Cloud benchmarking and performance analysis of an HPC application
in Amazon EC2
Tamara Dancheva1,2,3 • Unai Alonso1 • Michael Barton3,4
Received: 13 July 2022 / Revised: 22 May 2023 / Accepted: 23 May 2023 / Published online: 28 June 2023
 The Author(s) 2023
Abstract
Cloud computing platforms have been continuously evolving. Features such as the Elastic Fabric Adapter (EFA) in the
Amazon Web Services (AWS) platform have brought yet another revolution in the High Performance Computing (HPC)
world, further accelerating the convergence of HPC and cloud computing. Other public clouds also support similar features
further fueling this change. In this paper, we show how and why the performance of a large-scale computational ﬂuid
dynamics (CFD) HPC application on AWS competes very closely with the one on Beskow—a Cray XC40 supercomputer
at the PDC Center for High-Performance Computing - in terms of cost-efﬁciency with strong scaling up to 2304 processes.
We perform an extensive set of micro and macro benchmarks in both environments and conduct a comparative analysis.
Until as recently as 2020 these benchmarks have notoriously yielded unsatisfactory results for the cloud platforms
compared with on-premise infrastructures. Our aim is to access the HPC capabilities of the cloud, and in general to
demonstrate how researchers can scale and evaluate the performance of their application in the cloud.
Keywords AWS  C5n.x18large  ParallelCluster  Benchmark  HPC  EFA
1 Introduction
Cloud computing has revolutionized the way computa-
tional resources are delivered by making them available
on-demand and at a low cost. Consistent with the democ-
ratization of technology in this era of globalization, it has
made computing power and data storage more affordable
and accessible than ever before [1]. The existence of
hundreds of cloud providers today attests to the massive
success of cloud computing.
Small companies and individuals can now get access to
the IT infrastructure they need without any investment in
hardware and maintenance. It has considerably cut down the
cost of IT and enabled companies to scale up with little effort
compared with before. Naturally, the potential of using cloud
service providers has widely attracted researchers’ attention,
some of whom have conducted feasibility studies of moving
their research in the cloud ([2–4] among the ﬁrst). When it
comes to large-scale high-performance computing applica-
tions, which is the topic of this paper, the question becomes
the following. Can the performance of HPC applications in
the cloud match the one in on-premises infrastructures?
In this paper, we pursue the idea of moving HPC in the
cloud and provide a thorough performance analysis making
use of the latest advances of AWS in the direction of HPC.
However, the general procedure we outline to evaluate the
performance of the application and the trends we describe
could serve as blueprint for any comparative study of this
type regardless of the cloud platform or on-premise
infrastructure.
Unai Alonso and Michael Barton have contributed equally to
this work.
& Tamara Dancheva
tdancheva001@ikasle.ehu.eus; tdancheva@bcamath.org
Unai Alonso
unai.alonso@ehu.eus
Michael Barton
barton@bcamath.org
1
Mechanical Engineering, University of the Basque Country,
Alameda Urquijo s/n., Bilbao 48013, Vizcaya, Spain
2
University of the Basque Country, Barrio de Sarriena, s/n,
48940 Leioa, Vizcaya, Spain
3
Simulation of Wave Propagation, Basque Center for Applied
Mathematics, Mazarredo 14, Bilbao 48009, Vizcaya, Spain
4
Ikerbasque - Basque Foundation for Sciences, Maria Diaz de
Haro 3, Bilbao 48013, Basque Country, Spain
123
Cluster Computing (2024) 27:2273–2290
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10586-023-04060-4
(0123456789().,-volV)(0123456789().
,- volV)


2 Literature review
According to the taxonomy of efforts in HPC presented by
Netto et al. [5], the contribution of this paper is in the
category of HPC in the cloud or speciﬁcally, viability
studies of moving HPC to cloud environments. Early
explorations have been initiated as early as in 2008. Studies
from this early period of cloud computing such as the ones
performed by Walker [2], Napper et al. [3] and Ostermann
et al. [4] categorically concluded that the cloud is not yet
mature for tightly coupled HPC applications.
In 2010, Amazon EC2 introduced the ﬁrst generation of
HPC infrastructure. However, various studies from 2010
[6–9], and more importantly 2011, still indicated that while
the cloud is cost effective and delivers satisfactory per-
formance for ‘‘low communication-intensive applications
such as embarrassingly parallel and tree-structured com-
putations’’ [10], it is still not mature enough for HPC
applications. Zhai et al. [11] and the Magellan Report [12]
both concluded that the lack of of a high performance
network severely limits the execution of tightly-coupled
HPC applications.
Numerous studies [13–17] from the period between
2012 and 2015 indicate that while cloud computing is not
yet mature for HPC, the performance is becoming com-
parable. In particular, Mehrotra et al. in their ‘‘Performance
evaluation of amazon EC2 for NASA HPC applications’’
[13], state that although the HPC performance in the AWS
lags behind the one on their reference supercomputer due
to the network technology and virtualization overhead, it is
quickly catching up.
Starting from 2016 to 2018, feasibility studies [18, 19]
suggest that a hybrid approach would make the most of the
two environments, cloud and on-premise clusters, given
that the network latency is still higher in the cloud [20, 21].
Despite this, Bartosz et al. [21] ﬁnd that the elastic cloud
can provide a better turnaround time, ‘‘reducing the time to
science’’. A comparative paper by Mohammadi also claims
that ‘‘the performance on public cloud can be comparable
to modern traditional supercomputing systems’’ [22]. In
short, the outlook for HPC in the cloud brightens.
For a more complete literature review of feasibility
studies in the cloud until 2018 we refer the readers to [5].
The needs of researchers regarding HPC have been
heard and taken into account by cloud providers. In the
case of Amazon, the result is the announcement of the
RDMA/ EFA (Elastic Fabric Adapter) networking interface
with up to 100 Gbps bandwidth, in 2019. Breuer et al. [23]
show promising results for Seismic Simulations in the
cloud and state that this new development, once released, is
expected to further improve the strong scalability of their
applications. Other promising studies include NASA’s
evaluation of Azure cloud for HPC [24], Maliszewski’s
study of interconnection in Azure Cloud [25, 26] and
Guidi’s et al. [27] summary/survey on cloud perfomrance
over the last ten years.
Finally, with the release of EFA, Zhuang et al. [28]
show that Amazon EC2 achieves comparable performance
to local supercomputing clusters for their GEOS-Chem
atmospheric chemistry simulations, due to recent devel-
opments in the network performance and reduction of
virtualization overhead. They dispute the validity of the
paradigm that the cloud is not mature for HPC applications
EFA is an effort in the direction of long-term cooperation
with the industry, as highlighted by the MVAPICH project
[29]. Fernandez [30] conducts the HPCG benchmark in ﬁve
cloud platforms, highlighting among others the scalability
of the C5n.18xlarge instances. The computational ﬂuid
dynamics (CFD) package, Ansys Fluent [31], also show-
cases the performance results for a benchmark on AWS
EC2 of the external ﬂow over a Formula-1 Race car with
140 million hex-core cells using the Finite Volume Metod
(FVM). Similarly, Turner et al. [32] showcase the perfor-
mance of a Reynolds Averaged Navier–Stokes (RANS)
simulation of a full aircraft on Amazon EC2 c5n.18xlarge
instances. In contrast, our application uses the Finite Ele-
ment Method on tetrahedral meshes of a F1 Perrinn model,
which is a conceptually different method to be compared
directly. We also conduct thorough benchmarking in con-
junction with the performance of the application.
Today practically all major public cloud providers offer
HPC capabilities [33–35]. It is already a competitive
established market that caters to a notable number of pri-
vate
companies
(aerospace,
automotive,
biochemistry
among many). In comparison, in literature one ﬁnds very
few studies performed in academia showcase the perfor-
mance of HPC applications since the introduced changes.
The largest bottleneck identiﬁed for running HPC
applications right now in the cloud is the networking by
large consensus [5, 12, 13, 23–25, 28, 36, 37]. Different
clouds have addressed this problem to different degrees in
reference to each other and internally based on the choice
of node. De et al. [37] provide a very detailed study of the
network performance using MPI benchmarks for various
public clouds. The important takeaway relevant here is the
fact that network noise for HPC nodes i.e. with at least 100
Gbps bandwidth is comparable to the one on-premise,
further supporting the results we are about to present.
3 Goals and contributions
Networking, compute power and storage speed are the most
important factors that impact the performance of scientiﬁc
applications. Firstly, we benchmark these factors separately.
2274
Cluster Computing (2024) 27:2273–2290
123


Compute power and networking are the most relevant ones
for our application. We then evaluate their impact on the
performance of our massively parallel CFD application.
Typically, applications are categorized into four main cate-
gories: compute-intensive, memory-intensive, data-inten-
sive, and high-throughput. We should note that the
application we selected is partly compute-intensive, partly
memory-intensive. Therefore, networking and compute
power have an especially strong impact on the performance.
Researchers can use a wide range of tools to characterize
their own applications (for example VTune Proﬁler [38]).
In this paper we report the results from benchmarking
and examining the performance of HPC applications on
Amazon EC2, using the open-source tool developed by
AWS, ParallelCluster (released in November 2018 [39]).
Relatively recent technological advancement such as the
AWS Nitro Hyperviso, a very light hypervisor that
removes a large part of the virtualization overhead, was
introduced in 2017. The Elastic Fabric Adapter (EFA)
feature is available in ParallelCluster as of April 2019 [40].
These technologies have largely made possible the results
presented in the subsequent sections.
The contributions of this work are:
I
Thorough benchmarking using the OSU micro bench-
marks and the NASA macro benchmarks. The results
can be used as indicators to make predictions about the
performance of HPC applications by other researchers
who might want to migrate their research to the cloud.
II
Performance analysis of an HPC application con-
sisting of strong scaling and proﬁling. This applica-
tion represents a large class of problems that involve
solving a system of non-linear PDEs, using the
Newton method, solving a linear system of equations
in each iteration. It generalizes to many scientiﬁc
applications in different ﬁelds, discretized with the
Finite Element method, with sparse systems of
equations. In conjunction with I), we identify the
underlying
factors
that
lead
to
improved
performance.
Both I) and II) are conducted in Amazon EC2 and on
Beskow, a Cray XC40 supercomputer, followed by a
comparative analysis. Throughout the process, we explain
and highlight general trends that are relevant for these
types of feasibility studies.
4 Configuration
Table 1 shows a summary of the hardware speciﬁcations of
both environments discussed in this section, in terms of
node
compute
power,
memory
conﬁguration
and
networking.
In conjunction, we describe in detail the conﬁguration of
the two environments in which we have run both the
benchmarks (micro and macro) and the HPC application.
Simultaneously, we outline how to create an AWS EC2
cluster and which tools to use.
4.1 Amazon EC2 and AWS ParallelCluster
Amazon EC2 stands for Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud. It
is one of the Amazon Web Services which offers users
access to computational resources physically distributed in
data centers across the globe.
ParallelCluster is an open-source, command-line tool
developed by Amazon that enables a quick way to set up
and manage a cluster in Amazon EC2 from a conﬁguration
ﬁle. It consists of various groups of conﬁguration options
or sections. Table 2 details a conﬁguration that yields
satisfactory performance for an initial exploration of the
cloud’s capabilities with ParallelCluster v2. The latest
version at the time of writing, v3, offers an interactive
setup using either CLI or UI interface for the same options.
For a full list of options, see the documentation for AWS
ParallelCluster [41].
The C5n instances in Amazon’s Compute Optimized
family are ﬁt for computationally intensive workloads due
Table 1 Hardware speciﬁcations of both environments
Hardware
speciﬁcations
AWS EC2
Beskow
# Nodes
auto, max 40
2060
Processor
2 x
Intel(R) Xeon(R) Platinum
8124 M
E5-2698v3 Haswell
Frequency
3.00GHz (Skylake)
2.3 GHz
# Physical
cores
18
16
# SMT
2
2
L1 cache
64KB
64KB
L2 cache
1024KB
256KB
L3 cache
25MB
20.48MB
Main Memory
192 GiB
64 GB
NVRAM per
node
35 GB
–
Networking
technology
Elastic Fabric Adapter (EFA)
100 Gbps
Cray Aries
(Dragonﬂy
topology) 100
Gbps
Latency
 15.69 ls
1.92 ls
Power
consumption
400W per node
 376W per node
Turbo boost
mode
On
On
Cluster Computing (2024) 27:2273–2290
2275
123


to their Enhanced Network Bandwidth support for high-
speed communication between nodes, taking advantage of
the Nitro System and the Elastic Fabric Adapter (EFA) to
deliver network bandwidth of 100 Gbps [40]. The EFA
feature was introduced in 2019 [42], at which point the C5n
instances were state-of-the-art. They remained so at the
time of conducting this study and until the end of 2020
when new instances have been added to the Compute
Optimized family i.e C6a, C6i, C6in, C6g, C6gn, and C7g
[43]. AWS has also created a new HPC family that includes
hpc6a and hpc6id, introduced at the end of 2021 and 2022
accordingly [44]. Since our reference cluster runs on Intel
processors, in this study our aim was to get to as even
baseline as possible as a ﬁrst step, using machines with
same bandwidth (100 Gbps) and type of processor (Intel).
Next step would be to incrementally introduce extra layers
of complexity by extending the study to Graviton and
AMD architectures with same network bandwidth as the
C5n nodes i.e. C6gn, and hpc6a respectively. The only
candidates with network bandwidth not inferior or equal to
100 Gbps are C6in, C6id, and C7gn, all of them introduced
at the end of 2022 with the optimized version of the EFA,
that open new interesting possibilities to explore.
The C5n.x18large instances are equipped with two
sockets x 18 Intel(R) Xeon(R) Platinum 8124 M CPU @
3.00GHz (Skylake), a total of 72 vCPUs with Simultaneous
Multithreading and 192 GiB of memory. Our conﬁguration
consists of up to 40 compute nodes, C5n.x18large type
(max_queue_size setting). For the master node responsible
for coordinating compute nodes, compiling code, and
interacting with the job scheduler, we balance cost and
performance by opting for a C5n.4xlarge instance. We
utilize Ubuntu 18.04 as the base_os (see Table 2).
Amazon uses its proprietary Nitro System to create and
manage virtual machines in the cloud. This system includes
the light-weight Nitro Hypervisor, ofﬂoading hypervisor
workload to dedicated components: Nitro Cards, and Nitro
Security Chip. This reduces virtualization overhead - one
of the major bottlenecks in the past, and improves perfor-
mance [45].
The job scheduler handles job initiation, scheduling, and
monitoring. The latest version of ParallelCluster provides
several options for cluster schedulers, including Son of
Grid Engine, Slurm Workload Manager, Torque Resource
Manager, and AWS Batch. In the speciﬁc conﬁguration
mentioned in Table 2, Slurm is chosen as the scheduler,
same as the reference supercomputer.
The HPC application we focus on in this paper makes
use of the standardized Message Passing Interface (MPI).
The choice of MPI implementation can impact the per-
formance of your application dramatically. It is noteworthy
to mention that alternatives to using MPI implementations,
such as Chapel, UPC, UPC??, Spark, and others, might be
worth looking into as well. Techniques such as multilevel
parallelism [46] can further improve performance or
algorithms that employ non-blocking MPI routines espe-
cially for Graviton and AMD based nodes with more
compute power such as Hpc6a, C6gn, etc [47].
We have tested two MPI implementations on our clus-
ter: Open MPI and Intel MPI. Both of them wrap around
the open-source GNU compiler. The IntelMPI version
available through AWS is the open-source version of the
Intel MPI wrapper that wraps around the GNU compiler.
The placement of the nodes within a chosen time zone is
also crucial. To minimize the distance between the nodes
and achieve a low-latency network performance, we can
use the placement group options available (placement_-
group in Table 2).
For storage, we utilize a 6000 GB gp2 SSD volume,
providing a maximum of 16000 IOPS and a Max
Throughput/Volume of 250 MB/s. This mid-range option
offers both competitive pricing and performance, making it
suitable for a diverse range of workloads.
The Nitro card for VPC supports several network
acceleration features, such as EFA (it optimizes for latency
between 2 instances, scaling elasticity). You can enable the
Table 2 An example of an AWS ParallelCluster conﬁguration ﬁle
Conﬁguration options
[global] section
cluster_template = NAME_CLUSTER
update_check = true
sanity_check = true
[aws] section, conﬁdential - id, access key and region
[cluster NAME_CLUSTER] section
key_name = SSH_PRIVATE_KEY_NAME
master_instance_type = c5n.4xlarge
compute_instance_type = c5n.18xlarge
master_root_volume_size = 25
compute_root_volume_size = 35
base_os = ubuntu1804
max_queue_size = 40
scheduler = slurm
placement_group = DYNAMIC
vpc_settings = NAME_VPC
ebs_settings = NAME_EBS
enable_efa = compute
cluster_type = spot
[vpc NAME_VPC] section - id and subnet id
[ebs NAME_EBS] section
shared_dir = NAME_SHARED_FOLDER
volume_type = gp2
volume_size = 6000
2276
Cluster Computing (2024) 27:2273–2290
123


EFA (a network device) option through the enable_efa ﬂag
in the conﬁguration Table 2. RDMA (Remote Direct
Memory Access) is a network protocol used to side-step
the processor and exchange data between two main mem-
ories directly, bypassing the OS. We observed a signiﬁcant
impact using this feature in our results, which prompted us
to write this paper.
Last but not least, the advances in load balancing, task
scheduling, resource allocation, and distributed computing
algorithms for network communication also play a signif-
icant role in the overall performance in the cloud. They
facilitate the ability to have a reliable low communication
latency between the nodes in a worldwide distributed
system, a crucial factor in getting a good performance.
On the software side, we use the open-source Spack
manager to manage the packages in a modular way
[48, 49]. It allows for a quick installation of core depen-
dencies we need to run our software, enabling different
versions to coexist without any issue - an essential
requirement in supercomputing environments.
4.2 Beskow—Cray XC40 supercomputer
Beskow [50], a Cray XC40 supercomputer, located at the
PDC Center for High-Performance Computing in Stock-
holm, consists of 11 cabinets with a total of 2060 compute
nodes and 67,456 cores. Each node contains 2 Intel CPUs:
•
9 cabinets with Xeon E5-2698v3 Haswell 2.3 GHz (16
cores/CPU)
•
2 cabinets with Xeon E5-2695v4 Broadwell 2.1 GHz(18
cores/CPU)
We have run the benchmarks and the simulations on the
Xeon E5-2698v3 Haswell 2.3 GHz nodes. The nodes
interconnect with a High-speed network Cray Aries
(Dragonﬂy topology) that also supports RDMA operations.
The Haswell nodes have 64 GB of RAM, and the
Broadwell nodes have 128GB. Beskow has in its disposal a
5 Petabyte Lustre ﬁle system.
Beskow achieves a peak performance of 2.438 Petaﬂops
(1015 ﬂoating-point operations per second). The Linpack
benchmark has a long-standing history as a criterion for
ranking the top supercomputers. This benchmark solves
dense systems of linear equations and naturally is not a
reference for the performance of all kinds of applications.
Beskow lists a Linpack performance of 1.80 Petaﬂops.
Based on the type of application, we need a representative
benchmark
to
obtain
an
accurate
estimate
of
its
performance.
Beskow also relies on Slurm as a scheduler. The results
reported in this study have been obtained with the native
Cray MPI implementation, the most optimized one for the
underlying hardware.
5 Benchmarks
The microbenchmarks are small pieces of code that have
the purpose of quantifying the basic building blocks of a
program separately. The macro-benchmarks, on the other
hand, consist of a more complex code that should be rep-
resentative of the class of problems for which we try to
extract conclusions. In this case, we are looking at a sci-
entiﬁc application that requires the discretization and
solution of a system of time-dependent partial differential
equations. We run the benchmarks in the order of
increasing speciﬁcity.
In this study we run all the OSU micro-benchmark
conﬁgurations for each message size and number of pro-
cesses 3000 times skipping the initial 100 runs (i.e.
warmup iterations which aim to avoid ﬂuctuations in the
runtime) on the same set of nodes (two nodes for the point
to point MPI benchmarks and up to 4 nodes for the col-
lective MPI and NASA benchmarks). The conﬁgurations of
the NAS Parallel Benchmarks were run 5 times each. In the
plots we show the mean value and the standard deviation of
the results.
5.1 OSU Micro-Benchmarks
The OSU Micro-benchmarks [51] measure the perfor-
mance of a comprehensive set of MPI routines. The amount
of time spent in communication between the processes
should stay within a reasonable limit. As we scale our
application up to a larger number of cores, it can become a
bottleneck that will affect the performance severely. Dif-
ferent MPI implementations deploy various strategies and
algorithms, which results in differing performance. In this
paper, we report the results from the following two cate-
gories: Point-to-Point MPI and Collective MPI.
5.1.1 Point-To-Point MPI benchmarks
The Point-To-Point MPI communication refers to the MPI
send-and-receive routines that send and receive a message
from one process to another. Using these routines, we can
derive some fundamental performance indicators, such as
the latency and the bandwidth between two nodes in a
system (a supercomputing environment or a distributed one
such as the AWS EC2 one). The latency benchmark con-
sists of a ping-pong exchange of messages between two
processes, obtaining an average one-way latency value.
The bandwidth benchmark aims to determine the maxi-
mum data rate possible by sending multiple messages
without waiting for an acknowledgment by the receiver.
AWS ParallelCluster offers support for setting up an
HPC cluster with pre-installed Intel MPI and Open MPI. If
Cluster Computing (2024) 27:2273–2290
2277
123


EFA is enabled (enable_efa option in Table 2), Paral-
lelCluster sets up the following software stack. It starts
with the EFA Kernel Module on the bottom, a Libfabric
Network Stack in the middle, and the MPI implementations
on the top. The alternative to using EFA is using the
Transmission Control Protocol (TCP). TCP results in
longer latencies and is less ﬁt for tightly-coupled applica-
tions than RDMA.
The results from the OSU latency benchmarks, shown in
Fig. 1, compare the latency between two processes on two
nodes using EFA-enabled Intel MPI and Open MPI on the
AWS EC2 cluster and Beskow using Cray MPI. For
smaller message sizes, up to 4KiB (1 Kibibyte is 1024
Bytes), Beskow exhibits signiﬁcantly lower latencies than
the AWS cluster. For larger message sizes, up to 256 KiB
(Fig. 1), the gap between the supercomputer and the cloud
closes. For messages larger than 256 KiB, the discrepancy
arises again, and Beskow records lower latencies. Intel MPI
and Open MPI on AWS behave similarly on a broad range
of message sizes from 1 B to 1 MiB, with fractionally
higher latencies for Open MPI. We ﬁnd that when running
the same benchmark on one node, the latencies for Open
MPI are abnormally high, due to a conﬁrmed issue at the
time of running the study (see [52]) with the Libfabric
provider for EFA not detecting a local process. Given the
issue and that their internode latencies are slightly better
for Intel MPI, we have chosen to run the rest of the
benchmarks and the ﬁnal application using Intel MPI.
The results from the bandwidth benchmark shown in
Fig. 2 follow a similar pattern, however in favor of AWS.
For smaller message sizes, up to 1024B (Fig. 2a) both
environments achieve similar results. For more than 1024
B, up to 256 KiB (Fig. 2b), AWS shows higher to equal-
ized bandwidth. Beskow shows slightly better results in the
rest, up to 1 MiB.
These ﬁndings are indicators of the shift that has taken
place because numerous viability studies for moving HPC
to the cloud since 2008 (see Section 2) list the lack of a fast
network suitable for HPC applications as an impediment.
The latency and the bandwidth are now comparable to the
reference supercomputer for a wide range of message sizes,
most notably for the bandwidth, rather than the latency in
the window of message size we are examining.
MPI implementations offer the possibility of tuning
them for our needs (for example tuning transport protocol
algorithms
and
parameters),
either
through
runtime
parameters or conﬁguration ﬁles. The very low latencies on
Beskow for very small and very large message sizes are the
(a) Latency for small messages from 256B to 16KiB
(b) Latency for large messages from 16KiB to 1MiB
Fig. 1 Latency between 2 nodes on AWS with Intel and Open MPI, and on Beskow with Cray MPI
(a) Bandwidth for small messages from 256B to 16KiB
(b) Bandwidth for large messages from 16KiB to 1MiB
Fig. 2 Bandwidth between 2 nodes on AWS with Intel and Open MPI, and on Beskow with Cray MPI
2278
Cluster Computing (2024) 27:2273–2290
123


result of the tuning of the Cray MPI implementation, the
underlying transport and routing protocols (proprietary in
the case of AWS) and last level cache cache misses [37].
Similarly, so is the high bandwidth of close to 6000 MB/s
for small message sizes on AWS (Fig. 2a). This is dis-
cussed in more detail in the discussion.
5.1.2 Collective MPI benchmarks
The Collective MPI functions communicate information
between a group of processes. In this section, we present
the results from benchmarking the collectives that take
most of the time spent in communication between pro-
cesses for our HPC application. Additionally, we have run
all the blocking and non-blocking collective MPI bench-
marks for up to 128 cores and a message size of 1MiB.
Figure 5 shows the results for MPI Allreduce, MPI
Allgather, MPI Reduce, MPI Alltoall, MPI Alltoallv, and
MPI Allgatherv. The overall latency for AWS becomes
distinctly lower as the number of processes increases for
each of the functions. As a general observation, we can
conclude that for larger message size, the AWS EC2
cluster exhibits good scalability (as evidenced by other
recent studies [30, 37]). It performs better or comparable to
Beskow, for most of the blocking MPI calls. In some cases,
such as Fig. 3a 4, 5b, 5b AWS performs considerably
better with much higher latencies for Beskow, as the
message size increases.
The reason behind the efﬁciency and low performance
variability of the collectives on AWS are the advances in
the underlying distributed computing algorithms, resource
allocation, hypervisor technology, MPI tuning of the
algorithms behind the implementation of the collectives,
the proprietary transport protocol and EFA adapter.
We ﬁnd that the benchmarks for MPI Broadcast
(broadcast a message from one process to all others) and
MPI Barrier (synchronize all the tasks) stand out from the
rest. Figure 6a shows that MPI Broadcast exhibits up to
two times higher latencies than Beskow for 128 processes
and, Fig. 6b shows that MPI Barrier exhibits up to 8 times
higher latencies than Beskow for 128 processes. It is
expected that one of the reasons is that Beskow (Cray
XC40) ofﬂoads Barrier to hardware to accelerate it.
(a) MPI AllReduce
(b) MPI AllGather
Fig. 3 Benchmarking of the MPI Allreduce and Allgather Collective routines
(a) MPI Reduce
(b) MPI AllToAll
Fig. 4 Benchmarking of the MPI Reduce and AlltoAll Collective routines
Cluster Computing (2024) 27:2273–2290
2279
123


In our code, these latencies do not pose a problem since
Barrier and Broadcast constitute a negligible portion of the
total MPI communication time (Fig. 9 in Sect. 6.3).
5.2 NAS parallel benchmarks
The NAS benchmarks have been created by the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration agency (NASA) to
evaluate the suitability of new architectures [53]. The
package has become representative of a wide range of
categories of scientiﬁc applications, although it initially
aimed to estimate the performance of computational ﬂuid
dynamics applications. In particular, we are interested in
the high throughput or tightly-coupled applications. We
also hope to be able to contribute in a more general sense
with the results from these benchmarks. Readers who are
interested in porting their application to the cloud may ﬁnd
these ﬁndings relevant.
The plots in this section show the results from the
original eight benchmarks that consist of the following:
Integer Sort (IS), Embarrassingly Parallel (EP), Conjugate
Gradient (CG), Multi-Grid (MG), 3D fast Fourier Trans-
form (FT), a Block Tri-diagonal solver (BT), Scalar Penta-
diagonal solver (SP), and a Lower-Upper Gauss-Seidel
solver (LU).
5.2.1 OpenMP benchmarks
Figure 7 shows the elapsed time from running the NAS
benchmarks using OpenMP in shared-memory on one node
with 32 threads and 64 threads on both Beskow and the
AWS EC2 cluster. On Beskow, the code is compiled with
Cray Clang and on AWS with the GNU compiler. In both
cases, for all benchmarks, AWS yields better performance
than Beskow. For 32 threads, it achieves a mean speedup of
1.7 and for 64 of 1.37.
5.2.2 MPI benchmarks
Figure 8 visualizes the performance from running the
benchmarks with MPI on two nodes (problem size C1) and
eight nodes (problem size D) in elapsed time. On Beskow,
(a) MPI AllToAllV
(b) MPI AllGatherV
Fig. 5 Benchmarking of the MPI Alltoallv and Allgatherv Collective routines
(a) Benchmarking of MPI Broadcast
(b) Benchmarking of MPI Barrier
Fig. 6 Results from the OSU benchmarks for MPI Broadcast and Barrier up to 256 processes
1 The problem sizes of the NAS Parallel Benchmarks from smallest
to largest are categorized into classes S, W, A, B, C, D, E, and F. For
the CG benchmark, the size of the problem ranges from 1.4K rows in
the left-hand side matrix to 54 million rows. Class C packs 150K rows
and size D packs 1.5 million rows for CG.
2280
Cluster Computing (2024) 27:2273–2290
123


the code is compiled with Cray MPICH and on AWS with
Intel MPI wrapped around the GNU compiler. Again, AWS
prevails with less time than Beskow in both cases, for all
benchmarks. On 2 nodes AWS achieves a mean of 1.4
times more bandwidth than on Beskow and on 8 nodes it
records a similar value of 1.45 times.
6 Massively parallel FEniCS-HPC application
FEniCS-HPC [54] is a platform written in C?? that con-
sists of Dolﬁn-HPC, a highly parallel FEM (Finite Element
Method) library for solving general partial differential
equations, and UNICORN, a continuum mechanics solver
built up on top of Dolﬁn-HPC.
The advantages that it gives over other solvers lie in:
•
The automation of discretization and assembly -
generation of a wide gallery of ﬁnite element types,
arbitrary polynomial order, and ﬁnite element spaces.
The whole process is based on the weak formulation
obtained from the strong form by integration by parts in
the case of second or higher-order derivatives (similar
to the analytical process of solving a PDE on paper). It
allows the users to rather focus on the problem.
•
The automation of discrete solutions - at the heart lies the
solution of a linear system of equations using a variety of
methods available through the external linear algebra back-
end, PETSc, such as AMG, iterative, and direct methods.
•
The automation of error control - based on a measure of
choice or an error indicator, that can be obtained from
the dual problem.
6.1 CFD Model
The Direct Finite Element Method (Direct FEM) refers to a
turbulence model (described in more detail in [55, 56], and
[57]), implemented within Unicorn. It uses the the piece
wise linear General Galerkin (G2) method and belongs to
the category of stabilized space-time methods.
Equation (1) shows the weak form of the Euler equa-
tions with Least Squared Stabilization.
Un  Un1
ð
Þ
kn
þ ^
Un  r ^
Unv


þ rPn; v
ð
Þ þ r  ^
Un; q


þ d1ð ^
Un  r ^
Un þ rPnÞ; ^
Un  rv þ rq


þ d2r  ^
Un; r  v


¼ 0
ð1Þ
(a) Run with 32 threads
(b) Run with 64 threads
Fig. 7 Results from the NAS benchmarks using OpenMP, problem class C
(a) Problem size class C, on 2 nodes
(b) Problem size class D, on 8 nodes
Fig. 8 Results from the NAS benchmarks using MPI, problem class C and D
Cluster Computing (2024) 27:2273–2290
2281
123


where ^
U
n ¼ UnþUn1
2
for all (v,q) 2 Vh x Qh, and Vh 2 ½Wn3
and Qh 2 ½Wn are ﬁnite element approximation spaces, Vh
being
a
vector
ﬁnite
element
space.
d1 ¼ j1ðk2
n
þ
kUn1k2h2
n Þ1=2
and
d2 ¼ j2hn
are
the
stabilization
parameters with constants j1 and j2.
In order to solve the non-linear system of equations, we
use the Newton method, with the Conjugate Gradient linear
solver with a Block Jacobi preconditioner for the continuity
and the Biconjugate gradient stabilized method with a
Block Jacobi preconditioner for the momentum.
6.2 Aerodynamics simulation of a Perrinn F1 car
We will now analyze the performance of a CFD (Com-
putational ﬂuid dynamics) application implemented in
FEniCS-HPC. We present the results for an incompressible
CFD simulation around a F1 car (Perrinn model with 25
million cells). We chose this particular simulation as a
showcase because it is one of the most challenging CFD
simulations, and it is representative of the other CFD
simulations we run with FEniCS-HPC, as well as other
FEM applications that involve the solution of non-linear
PDEs and sparse solvers. This application is developed on
top of the latest development branch of Unicorn at the time
of writing, using the Direct FEM. The solver is completely
parallelized with MPI and MPI I/O.
6.3 MPI profiling
We have proﬁled the HPC application with Integrated
Performance Monitor (IPM) [58]. The information we aim
to extract from the reports is the most time-consuming MPI
routines in our application and statistics about the message
sizes. Figure 9 shows the results from the proﬁling of our
application with 256 processes distributed between 8
nodes.
Figure 9a displays a pie plot of the most consuming MPI
routines. For all the functions except MPI_Irecv, MPI does
not collect the message size for a message with status MPI_
STATUS_IGNORE, which affects receiving, probing, and
waiting functions. Consequently, it is safe to only take into
account MPI send and the MPI collectives. Excluding these
functions, we have shown the results from the OSU micro-
benchmarks for the top six time-consuming MPI collec-
tives (see Section 5.1.2).
Figure 9b shows the communication balance sorted by
task ID. There is more work done in the beginning due to
the initialization, and afterward, it starts to equalize. We
(a) MPI Communucation Time Pie
(b) Communication balance by task (sorted by task ID)
(c) Message Buﬀer Size Distributions: time
(d) Message Buﬀer Size Distributions: Ncalls
Fig. 9 IPM proﬁling results with 256 processes
2282
Cluster Computing (2024) 27:2273–2290
123


can see how much time each rank (or process ID) spends in
each communication routine. Having a good load balance
is crucial for the performance of HPC applications.
From Fig. 9c and Fig. 9d, ignoring the receive, probe,
and wait-like functions, we can see that the message size
ranges from 4 Bytes to 1 MB. Both the number of calls and
the elapsed time for each of the MPI routines represent
non-decreasing functions of the message size. Most of the
messages fall in the range from 4 B to 256 KB. This trend
holds for up to 1152 processes on 16 nodes. Given that the
problem size is constant, the messages get smaller and
barely exceed the 256 KiB mark. Therefore, in the analysis
that follows, we focus on the benchmarks results with
message size up to 256 KiB.
6.4 Results
We now show the results from the F1 car CFD simulation.
It was expected that the performance would be at least
similar to the one on Beskow, given that the latency,
bandwidth, and most relevant MPI collectives results for
our targeted message size range of 4 B to 256 KiB are
competing, and the NAS benchmarks show favorable
results for AWS. We veriﬁed that this is indeed the case.
The performance of the scientiﬁc application was mea-
sured similarly to the benchmarks, the mean of 10 runs, on
the same set of nodes, for 200 iterations of the transient
simulations.
6.4.1 Performance comparison
The largest part of the application runtime consists of:
•
Assembling the matrix (left-hand side of the system)
and the vector (right-hand side of the system) to be
solved. The majority of time in our application is spent
in the assembly stage [59], as can be observed from the
ﬁrst two plots in Fig. 10.
•
Solving the resulting non-linear systems of PDEs by
iteratively solving a series of linear systems of PDEs
that result from the momentum equation Eq. (1) line (1)
and the continuity equation Eq.(1) line (2). The
continuity equation requires considerably more itera-
tions to solve, thereby taking more time than the
momentum Fig. 10.
In the results below, we analyze these parts of the runtime
separately and together to have a better overview. The ﬁrst
plot in Fig. 10 compares the elapsed time for solving the
momentum and the continuity equation with 128, 256, 512,
and 1024 processes on Beskow and the AWS EC2 cluster.
The second plot in Fig. 10 compares the elapsed time
for assembling both the left-hand side and the right-hand
side in both environments. The time is plotted on a log
scale to be able to represent both functions of different
orders in one plot.
The ﬁrst and second plot in Fig. 11 show the total
elapsed time and speedup from 128 to 1024 processes (with
one core per processor). The third plot in Fig. 11 shows the
relative speedup of the two major components of the run-
time, associated with the momentum and the continuity in
both environments (with the ﬁrst datum taken as a
reference).
Table 3 shows the ratio
speedup AWS
speedup Beskow. In terms of
strong scaling, relative to the ﬁrst datum in Fig. 10 ( for
128 processors), Beskow exhibits slightly better scaling
than AWS given that the ratios are less than 100%
(Table 3, and the second plot in Fig. 11).
Table 4 quantiﬁes the plots shown in Fig. 10. From it,
we can conclude that we get a considerable speedup on the
AWS EC2 cluster for the assembly of the system compared
Fig. 10 Performance
comparison between AWS and
Beskow by components, strong
scaling
Cluster Computing (2024) 27:2273–2290
2283
123


to Beskow (see line 2 and line 4 in Table 4). For the
momentum, it is up to 1.4 times faster, and for the conti-
nuity, it is up to 1.2 times faster on the AWS EC2 cluster.
Solving the systems of PDEs using the Stabilized version
of BiConjugate Gradient for the momentum and Conjugate
Gradient for the continuity (in combination with successive
over-relaxation (SOR) preconditioning) results in a very
similar performance in both environments. Moreover, we
can see that for the momentum, we get a slightly better
speedup on AWS, while overall Beskow shows slightly
better speedup for the whole application (second plot in
Fig. 10). In terms of elapsed time, the CFD application
better performance on the AWS EC2 cluster than on Bes-
kow (see Table 4, values over 100% are in favor of AWS).
6.4.2 Strong scaling on AWS EC2 cloud
The application shows very satisfactory scaling on the
AWS EC2 cluster for up to 2304 processes with 72
processes per node Fig. 12. Since the size of the problem is
more suitable for a smaller number of nodes, we observe an
even better scaling for up to 1024 processes with 32 pro-
cesses per node Fig. 13.
6.4.3 Compute cost comparison
In this section we only look at the cost of the compute time.
We highlight that depending on the type of EBS volume
chosen, the cost of EBS can add considerably to the total
cost.
AWS offers three alternatives for the cluster type that
affect the cost of the compute time (see cluster_type in
Table 2): on-demand (most reliable, with reservation), spot
(use unused EC2 instances for a lower price), dedicated
(serving a single customer), and mixed strategies.
Figure 14 shows the ﬂuctuations of the price per hour
for the C5n.18xlarge instances in the past year in the us-
east region, and all its zones. We have run calculations in
the us-east-1a zone - the most stable region. We note that
the most volatile zone is us-east-1d with minimum and
maximum price of 1.3157$ and 1.5803$ per hour, respec-
tively. Figure 15 shows the savings of on-demand over
spot on the 18th of February 2022, with savings from
61.41% to 69.86% for the us-east-1a zone.
Cost-wise, we observe that the prices for the spot
instances are comparable: 0.024€/core-hour on Beskow (a
ﬂat rate set by the PDC Center for High-Performance
Computing),
0.030€/core-hour
for
C5n.18xlarge
spot
instances (based on the average price for zone us-east-1a
shown in Fig. 14), and 0.047€/core-hour for dedicated
C5n.18xlarge instances, with the exchange rates deﬁned by
the European Central Bank (ECB) on the 18th of February
2022. Using this data as reference, the savings over on-
Fig. 11 Performance
comparison between AWS and
Beskow, strong scaling
Table 3 Speedup AWS/Beskow %
Speedup
256p
512p
1024p
Mean
Momentum Total
94.2
94.9
93.66
94.26
Continuity Total
98.55
81.92
92.84
91.1
Table 4 Elapsed time ratio Beskow/AWS %
Elapsed time ratio
128p
256p
512p
1024p
Mom. Solve
114.34
102.13
102.22
100.58
Mom. Assemble
141.75
140.78
142.94
141.9
Cont. Solve
103.05
99.44
71.61
90.46
Cont. Assemble
128.26
129.14
126.21
125.41
2284
Cluster Computing (2024) 27:2273–2290
123


demand for the past year for the zone us-east-1a range from
69.8% to 70%.
We report the results from running on the spot nodes.
The difference between the spot nodes and the on-demand
nodes is in the availability. The spot nodes might become
unavailable and interrupt the execution of the program. The
availability depends on the current demand and the data
center/time zone that we are using. In the reported results,
100% of the runs have been uninterrupted and in fact the
frequency of interruption is less than 5% of the time with
70% and up savings over on-demand. For the C5n family,
the billing is per hour and choosing between spot and on-
demand does not make a difference in the performance
because the access to the node does not vary and since it is
the largest in the family, in both cases, we were the only
tenants (a tenant is a guest on the host machine, a virtual
machine) on the node, with exclusive access to all its
resources. We chose to use the C5n.x18large instance in
the C5n family because it is the largest in the family, which
means that whenever we get an allocation we are not
sharing with other users. The only difference is that there is
a chance that the computation will be interrupted by
another tenants if the demand is high when using the spot
instances.
Additionally, we have taken all the precautions for
ensuring that we are not taking into account any results
from interrupted instances by setting up interrupt notices,
deﬁning the interruption behavior, using the AWS console
tools for ﬁnding interrupted instances, checking the billing
and ﬁnally veriﬁcation of the validity of the results. Given
that we do not run critical applications, we deem that the
spot instances are a cost-effective solution for our needs.
Since we look at the price per core hour as the main
parameter for optimization, it means, slightly more work is
done per hour on AWS than on Beskow (despite the fact
that is scales slightly worse than Beskow).
7 Discussion and limitations
The purpose of this paper is to show that there are strong
indicators that one can get the very similar performance of
HPC applications for the same money on both the super-
computer and the cloud. It is a result of very recent trends
Fig. 12 AWS Performance, strong scaling, 72 processes per node
Fig. 13 AWS Performance, strong scaling, 32 processes per node
Cluster Computing (2024) 27:2273–2290
2285
123


and technologies and there is scarce evidence showing this
conclusion for tightly-coupled HPC applications.
The ﬁnal performance depends on a number of factors,
which, while we can analyze separately, we have no way of
quantifying completely how much they will affect the
performance. Therefore we opt not to do an adjustment of
the kind of scaling the strong scaling results by the ratio of
the compute power of the machines (frequency for exam-
ple). There are other factors apart from compute power,
such as network speed, the impact of RAM memory,
storage speed, MPI implementation details and algorithms,
MPI tuning, message size, instruction set, types of
instructions, turbo boost mode, and other architecture
speciﬁc characteristics of the hardware, which cannot be
directly accounted for with two largely different architec-
tures. The MPI implementation differences, algorithm
tuning, and underlying network can potentially have sig-
niﬁcant impact on the performance. For example, as it can
be seen from the MPI benchmarks, the collective algo-
rithms behind the Intel MPI implementation on AWS yield
decidedly better performance for the window of message
sizes characteristic for our application, while the latency
between two processes does not.
Therefore we rely on benchmarks relevant for what we
want to test, i.e. run the same code on the machine and look
at the effective performance. In this case we incrementally
increased the speciﬁcity of the benchmarks and ﬁnally we
ran our application.
7.1 Compute power
The performance of benchmarks such as the NAS EP
(Embarrassingly Parallel) benchmark, largely depend on
the compute power. The frequency in general does not
necessarily scale the same way as performance, because it
depends on other factors such as architecture, instructions
set, theoretical and sustained number of instructions/sec,
theoretical and sustained FLOPS, dynamic frequency,
compiler settings, and system processes running in the
background. In order to assume this approximation, we
have to make a lot of assumptions, for the compute related
parameters, as well as otherwise. Given the many differ-
ences in the architectures, we opted for relying on bench-
marks to examine the most inﬂuential indicators of the
performance, and ﬁnally optimize for cost per hour and
maintainability.
7.2 Network
The network performance is one of the most important
factors alongside compute power in the HPC world. As the
architectures grow more complex, so is the technology
improved and occasionally reinvented. However, the fact is
that network technology lags behind compute performance
advances by large in both on-premise architectures and in
cloud environments [37].
The InﬁniBand interconnect is one of the most popular
ones among supercomputers. The Inﬁnibanch technology
Fig. 14 Spot pricing for the us-
east region for c5n.18xlarge
instances in the period March
2021 to March 2022
Fig. 15 Current On-demand and Spot pricing for the us-east region for c5n.18xlarge instances
2286
Cluster Computing (2024) 27:2273–2290
123


stretches from the data layer to the transport layer in the
The Open Systems Interconnection model (OSI model
[60]). The latency is very low, the bandwidth is very high
up to 200Gb/s with HDR links and 100Gb/s with EDR
links in the case of Beskow. This interconnect is universal
for all trafﬁc types (such as communication between nodes,
storage etc). This is made possible by ofﬂoading a signif-
icant amount of work previously performed in software to
hardware, such as the one done by the transport protocol. It
also supports bypassing the OS completely to get directly
to the physical layer when sending messages across the
network, with zero copy, from the application space. This
RDMA feature is crucial for capitalizing on the large
interconnect bandwidth, given that repeatedly copying the
message to be sent incurs time delays due to the limited
memory
bandwidth.
Memory
latency
and
bandwidth
improvements have been stretched to a limit in the last
years, and innovative technology, such as 3D-stacked
DRAM, is on the rise.
The Elastic Fabric Adapter (EFA) is a network device
that similarly to the InﬁniBand’s RDMA features has the
power to bypass the OS to send communications to other
instances in the same subnet. The compute nodes in the
AWS cluster we have created are placed in the same sub-
net. The user can conﬁgure MPI with the Libfabric
framework, the interface between the user space and the
kernel space. This framework provides access to the drivers
of the EFA network device, making it possible to bypass
the OS. AWS has also developed a new transport protocol
for their needs, the scalable reliable datagram (SRD) [61].
The SRD focuses on minimizing the trafﬁc congestion and
therefore latency for large messages, as well as combating
load imbalance (crucial for HPC applications). It sends
packages out of order, on various paths with relatively low
trafﬁc, to achieve a bandwidth of 100Gb/s. SRD is there-
fore faster for larger messages, with a high bandwidth
overall, and a decidedly improved performance of collec-
tive MPI calls. This is in accordance with the ﬁndings in
the Section 5. Similarly to the transport protocol in Inﬁ-
niBand, the workings of SRD are ofﬂoaded to hardware,
the in-house Nitro networking card of AWS.
Cloud providers that offer HPC capabilities use different
network and routing protocols, however most of the ones
that deliver network bandwidth larger than 100 Gbps rely
on RDMA or RDMA-like technologies, omnipresent in on-
premise infrastructures [37].
In summary, Beskow has notably lower ping-pong
latency for smaller message sizes, however, as the message
size increases, in the middle range up to 256 KiB, AWS is
on par with Beskow. For the larger message sizes, Beskow
is again on top in terms of latency. Both environments have
a theoretical bandwidth of 100Gb/s and from the band-
width benchmarks, we can conclude that the effective
bandwidth of AWS exceeds the one of Beskow up to
256KiB. For larger messages sizes, up to 1MiB, Beskow
has an edge over AWS. In the 256KiB window of message
sizes relevant for our application, Beskow has lower
latency, however AWS exhibits higher bandwidth.
7.3 Software maintenance
Comments on cost of maintenance: Spack greatly simpli-
ﬁes the process of deployment in our case. It is an easy way
of handling dependencies, and allows for a separate envi-
ronment, minimizing conﬂicts with other versions and
packages. Installing the FEniCS-HPC stack on a new
cluster in general is time-consuming because of the mul-
titude of dependencies and external libraries it makes use
of. However, with Spack, the process has been consider-
ably accelerated.
7.4 Overall performance
In terms of compute power, AWS is superior to Beskow,
given the more powerful processor and the larger number
of cores (Table 1). We have conﬁrmed this with the Open
MPI and MPI results for the EP benchmark, part of the
NAS Parallel Benchmarks suite. Our application is bal-
anced between compute and memory intensive. Therefore,
whereas Beskow has better networking, lower latency for
most of the relevant window of message sizes and com-
parable and superior bandwidth for medium and large
message sizes correspondingly, AWS has more compute
power.
On the other hand, the MPI communication makes up a
large percentage of the application runtime, especially as
the number of processes increases. From the benchmarks
Section 5, we can clearly see that the elapsed time
increases with the number of processors and message size.
In the proﬁling case in Subsection 6.3 with 256 processes
on 8 nodes, the MPI communications takes 14% of the
runtime. From the proﬁling and the results of the OSU
benchmarks for the most time-consuming MPI functions,
we can conclude that on the AWS platform, we get an edge
over Beskow, when it comes to MPI communications.
Through the proﬁling and benchmarking, we have been
able to gain an insight into the impact of key factors on the
overall performance, as well as the performance of separate
components, such as MPI communication, assembly, and
solving the resulting systems of equations. Finally, we
observe that it is possible to obtain a slightly better per-
formance on the cloud in terms of elapsed time.
Cluster Computing (2024) 27:2273–2290
2287
123


8 Conclusion
In this paper, we have shown the results from running the
OSU micro-benchmarks relevant for our target HPC
application and the NAS Parallel macro-benchmarks in two
environments: AWS EC2 cluster and Beskow supercom-
puter. We conducted a comparative analysis for a wide
range of message sizes and processes of the full sets of
benchmarks to conclude that our application is suitable to
be run in the cloud. The ﬁnal results show strong scaling up
to 2304 cores in the cloud, and the performance is highly
competitive with the one on Beskow.
Finally, we have successfully ported a large-scale HPC
application to the cloud, providing further evidence of a
shift that began in 2020, contrary to an abundance of prior
feasibility studies. The performance competes with the one
on the supercomputer. Additionally, we get a fully con-
ﬁgurable and scalable environment we can tweak for our
needs. As a conclusion, this study conﬁrms that due to
recent advances, most notably on the networking tech-
nologies front, the cloud is getting closer to the on-premise
supercomputer, performance-wise, for HPC applications.
The increased adoption of cloud within research and fur-
thermore, the most recent advances in network technology
by cloud service platforms (AWS, Azure making available
network bandwidth of 200 Gbps [62–64]) are opening yet
again new frontiers for further exploration of the future of
HPC.
Acknowledgements The authors would like to thank Johan Jansson
for initiating the idea of exploring the possibilities of the cloud,
providing support in obtaining the resources, and the initial mesh for
the CFD simulation. This project has received funding from the
European Union’s Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions (MSCA) Inno-
vative Training Network (ITN) H2020-MSCA-ITN-2017 under grant
agreement No. 764979.
Author contributions All authors contributed to the study conception
and design. The computations and the data analysis were performed
by TD. The ﬁrst draft of the manuscript was written by TD and all
authors commented on previous versions of the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the ﬁnal manuscript.
Funding Open Access funding provided thanks to the CRUE-CSIC
agreement with Springer Nature. This work was supported by the
European Union’s Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions (MSCA) Inno-
vative Training Network (ITN) H2020-MSCA-ITN-2017 under grant
agreement No 764979. The authors declare that no funds, grants, or
other support were received during the preparation of this manuscript.
Data availability The datasets generated during and/or analysed dur-
ing the current study are not publicly available due to awaiting
publication but are available from the corresponding author on rea-
sonable request.
Declarations
Competing interest The authors have not disclosed any competing
interests.
Open Access
This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing,
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as
long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate
if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
1. Birje, M.N., Challagidad, P.S., Goudar, R., Tapale, M.T.: Cloud
computing review: concepts, technology, challenges and security.
Int. J. Cloud Comput. 6(1), 32–57 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1504/
IJCC.2017.083905
2. Walker, E.: Benchmarking amazon ec2 for hig-performance
scientiﬁc computing. ; login:: the magazine of USENIX & SAGE
33(5), 18–23 (2008)
3. Napper, J., Bientinesi, P.: Can cloud computing reach the top500?
In: Proceedings of the Combined Workshops on UnConventional
High Performance Computing Workshop Plus Memory Access
Workshop, pp. 17–20 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1145/1531666.
1531671
4. Ostermann, S., Iosup, A., Yigitbasi, N., Prodan, R., Fahringer, T.,
Epema, D.: A performance analysis of ec2 cloud computing
services for scientiﬁc computing. In: International Conference on
Cloud Computing, pp. 115–131 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-642-12636-9_9. Springer
5. Netto, M.A., Calheiros, R.N., Rodrigues, E.R., Cunha, R.L.,
Buyya, R.: Hpc cloud for scientiﬁc and business applications:
Taxonomy, vision, and research challenges. ACM Computing
Surveys (CSUR) 51(1), 1–29 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1145/
3150224
6. Arinze, B., Anandarajan, M.: Factors that determine the adoption
of cloud computing: A global perspective. Int. J. Enterp. Inf. Syst.
6(4), 55–68 (2010). https://doi.org/10.4018/jeis.2010100104
7. He, Q., Zhou, S., Kobler, B., Duffy, D., McGlynn, T.: Case study
for running hpc applications in public clouds. In: Proceedings of
the 19th ACM International Symposium on High Performance
Distributed Computing, pp. 395–401 (2010). https://doi.org/10.
1145/1851476.1851535
8. Jackson, K.R., Ramakrishnan, L., Muriki, K., Canon, S., Cholia,
S., Shalf, J., Wasserman, H.J., Wright, N.J.: Performance analysis
of high performance computing applications on the amazon web
services cloud. In: 2010 IEEE Second International Conference
on Cloud Computing Technology and Science, pp. 159–168
(2010). https://doi.org/10.1109/CloudCom.2010.69. IEEE
9. Rehr, J.J., Vila, F.D., Gardner, J.P., Svec, L., Prange, M.: Sci-
entiﬁc computing in the cloud. Comput. sci. Eng. 12(3), 34–43
(2010). https://doi.org/10.1109/MCSE.2010.70
10. Gupta, A., Milojicic, D.: Evaluation of hpc applications on cloud.
In: 2011 Sixth Open Cirrus Summit, pp. 22–26 (2011). https://
doi.org/10.1109/OCS.2011.10. IEEE
2288
Cluster Computing (2024) 27:2273–2290
123


11. Zhai, Y., Liu, M., Zhai, J., Ma, X., Chen, W.: Cloud versus in-
house cluster: evaluating amazon cluster compute instances for
running mpi applications. In: State of the Practice Reports,
pp. 1–10 (2011)
12. Coghlan, S.: The magellan ﬁnal report on cloud computing.
Technical report (dec 2011). https://doi.org/10.2172/1076794
13. Mehrotra, P., Djomehri, J., Heistand, S., Hood, R., Jin, H.,
Lazanoff, A., Saini, S., Biswas, R.: Performance evaluation of
amazon ec2 for nasa hpc applications. In: Proceedings of the 3rd
Workshop on Scientiﬁc Cloud Computing, pp. 41–50 (2012).
https://doi.org/10.1145/2287036.2287045
14. Expo´sito, R.R., Lo´pez Taboada, G., Pardo, X.C., Tourino, J.,
Doallo Biempica, R.: Running scientiﬁc codes on amazon ec2: A
performance analysis of ﬁve high-end instances. J. Comput. Sci.
Technol. 13(3), 153–159 (2013)
15. Expo´sito, R.R., Taboada, G.L., Ramos, S., Tourin˜o, J., Doallo,
R.: Performance analysis of hpc applications in the cloud. Futur.
Gener. Comput. Syst. 29(1), 218–229 (2013). https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.future.2012.06.009
16. Sadooghi, I., Martin, J.H., Li, T., Brandstatter, K., Maheshwari,
K., de Lacerda Ruivo, T.P.P., Garzoglio, G., Timm, S., Zhao, Y.,
Raicu, I.: Understanding the performance and potential of cloud
computing for scientiﬁc applications. IEEE Transactions on
Cloud Computing 5(2), 358–371 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1109/
TCC.2015.2404821
17. Rad, P., Chronopoulos, A., Lama, P., Madduri, P., Loader, C.:
Benchmarking bare metal cloud servers for hpc applications. In:
2015 IEEE International Conference on Cloud Computing in
Emerging Markets (CCEM), pp. 153–159 (2015). https://doi.org/
10.1109/CCEM.2015.13. IEEE
18. Freniere, C., Pathak, A., Raessi, M., Khanna, G.: The feasibility
of amazon’s cloud computing platform for parallel, gpu-accel-
erated, multiphase-ﬂow simulations. Comput. Sci. Eng. 18(5),
68–77 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1109/MCSE.2016.94
19. Gupta, A., Faraboschi, P., Gioachin, F., Kale, L.V., Kaufmann,
R., Lee, B.-S., March, V., Milojicic, D., Suen, C.H.: Evaluating
and improving the performance and scheduling of HPC appli-
cations in cloud. IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput. 4(3), 307–321
(2016). https://doi.org/10.1109/TCC.2014.2339858
20. Ditter, A., Graf, G., Fey, D.: Fe2vcl2: from bare metal to high
performance computing on virtual clusters and cloud infrastruc-
ture. In: Proceedings of the 4th Workshop on CrossCloud
Infrastructures & Platforms, pp. 1–7 (2017)
21. Balis, B., Figiela, K., Jopek, K., Malawski, M., Pawlik, M.:
Porting hpc applications to the cloud: A multi-frontal solver case
study. J. Comput. Sci. 18, 106–116 (2017). https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jocs.2016.09.006
22. Mohammadi, M., Bazhirov, T.: Comparative benchmarking of
cloud computing vendors with high performance linpack. In:
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on High Per-
formance Compilation, Computing and Communications, pp. 1–5
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1145/3195612.3195613
23. Breuer, A., Cui, Y., Heinecke, A.: Petaﬂop seismic simulations in
the public cloud. In: International Conference on High Perfor-
mance Computing, pp. 167–185 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-030-20656-7_9. Springer
24. NASA: NASA SC19 - High-Performance Computing in the
Azure Cloud. NASA Technical Reports Server (2023)
25. Maliszewski, A.M.: Impact of network interconnection in cloud
computing
environments
for
high-performance
computing
applications (2021)
26. Maliszewski, A.M., Roloff, E., Carren˜o, E.D., Griebler, D.,
Gaspary, L.P., Navaux, P.O.A.: performance and cost-aware hpc
in clouds: A network interconnection assessment. In: 2020 IEEE
Symposium on Computers and Communications (ISCC), pp. 1–6
(2020). https://doi.org/10.1109/ISCC50000.2020.9219554
27. 10 years later: Cloud computing is closing the performance gap.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3447545.3451183
28. Zhuang, J., Jacob, D.J., Lin, H., Lundgren, E.W., Yantosca, R.M.,
Gaya, J.F., Sulprizio, M.P., Eastham, S.D.: Enabling high-per-
formance cloud computing for earth science modeling on over a
thousand cores: Application to the GEOS-chem atmospheric
chemistry model. Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Sys-
tems 12(5) (2020). https://doi.org/10.1029/2020ms002064
29. Panda, D.K., Subramoni, H., Chu, C.-H., Bayatpour, M.: The
mvapich project: transforming research into high-performance
mpi library for hpc community. J. Comput. Sci. 52, 101208
(2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jocs.2020.101208
30. Fernandez, A.: Evaluation of the performance of tightly coupled
parallel solvers and mpi communications in iaas from the public
cloud. IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput. 10(4), 2613–2622 (2022).
https://doi.org/10.1109/TCC.2021.3052844
31. White., Emma.: Running ANSYS Fluent on Amazon EC2 C5n
with Elastic Fabric Adapter (EFA). AWS EC2 (2019). https://
aws.amazon.com/es/blogs/compute/running-ansys-ﬂuent-on-ama
zon-ec2-c5n-with-elastic-fabric-adapter-efa/
32. Appa, J., Turner, M., Ashton, N.: Performance of cpu and gpu
hpc architectures for off-design aircraft simulations. In: AIAA
Scitech 2021 Forum, p. 0141 (2021). https://doi.org/10.2514/6.
2021-0141
33. Amazon Web Services: AWS HPC. Amazon Web Services
(2023). https://aws.amazon.com/hpc/
34. Azure High-Performance Computing
35. Google: Google Cloud High-Performance Computing. Google
(2023). https://cloud.google.com/solutions/hpc
36. Chang, Y.-T., Hood, R.T., Jin, H., Heistand, S.W., Cheung, S.H.,
Djomehri, M.J., Jost, G., Kokron, D.S.: Evaluating the suitability
of commercial clouds for nasa’s high performance computing
applications: A trade study. Technical report (2018)
37. De Sensi, D., De Matteis, T., Taranov, K., Di Girolamo, S.,
Rahn, T., Hoeﬂer, T.: Noise in the clouds: Inﬂuence of network
performance variability on application scalability. Proceedings of
the ACM on Measurement and Analysis of Computing Systems
6(3), 1–27 (2022). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2210.15315
38. Intel: HPC Performance Characterization. Intel Corporation
(2023).
https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/docs/vtune-
proﬁler/user-guide/2023-0/hpc-performance-characterization-
view.html
39. Amazon Web Services: AWS Parallel Cluster. Amazon Web
Services (2021). https://aws.amazon.com/hpc/parallelcluster/
40. Amazon Web Services: Elastic Fabric Adapter. Amazon Web
Services (2021)
41. Amazon Web Services: AWS ParallelCluster Documentation.
Amazon Web Services (2021). https://docs.aws.amazon.com/
parallelcluster/
42. Barr., Jeff: Now Available - Elastic Fabric Adapter (EFA) for
Tightly-Coupled HPC Workloads. Amazon Web Services (2019).
https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/aws/now-available-elastic-fabric-
adapter-efa-for-tightly-coupled-hpc- workloads/
43. Amazon Web Services: Amazon EC2 Compute Optimized
Instances. Amazon Web Services (2023). https://docs.aws.ama
zon.com/AWSEC2/latest/UserGuide/compute-optimized-instan
ces.html
44. Amazon Web Services: Amazon EC2 Instance Types. Amazon
Web
Services
(2023).
https://aws.amazon.com/ec2/instance-
types/
45. Amazon Web Services: AWS Nitro System. Amazon Web Ser-
vices (2021). https://aws.amazon.com/ec2/nitro/
46. impact of using multi-levels of parallelism on hpc applications
performance hosted on azure cloud computing. https://doi.org/10.
1504/IJHPCN.2019.098579
Cluster Computing (2024) 27:2273–2290
2289
123


47. Ouro, P., Lopez-Novoa, U., Guest, M.F.: On the performance of a
highly-scalable computational ﬂuid dynamics code on amd, arm
and intel processor-based hpc systems. Comput. Phys. Commun.
269, 108105 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cpc.2021.108105
48. Gamblin, T., LeGendre, M., Collette, M.R., Lee, G.L., Moody,
A., De Supinski, B.R., Futral, S.: The spack package manager:
bringing order to hpc software chaos. In: Proceedings of the
International Conference for High Performance Computing,
Networking, Storage and Analysis, pp. 1–12 (2015). https://doi.
org/10.1145/2807591.2807623
49. AWS: AWS Workshop. AWS (2023). https://catalog.us-east-1.
prod.workshops.aws/workshops/dd0ffcb3-ffc1-4b58-8c4b-
09f9846549c7/en-US
50. PDC Center for High Performance Computing: Beskow. PDC
Center for High Performance Computing (2021)
51. Network-Based Computing (NBC) Laboratory, The Ohio State
University: MVAPICH: MPI over InﬁniBand, Omni-Path, Eth-
ernet/iWARP, and RoCE. Network-Based Computing (NBC)
Laboratory, The Ohio State University (2021). https://mvapich.
cse.ohio-state.edu/benchmarks/
52. Lin, H.: Abnormal in-node latency with EFA enabled. Github,
aws-parallelcluster
(2019).
https://github.com/aws/aws-paral
lelcluster/issues/1143
53. NASA
Advanced
Supercomputing
(NAS)
Division
NASA
Advanced Supercomputing (NAS) Division (2021). https://www.
nas.nasa.gov/publications/npb.html
54. Hoffman, J., Jansson, J., Jansson, N.: Fenics-hpc: Automated
predictive high-performance ﬁnite element computing with
applications in aerodynamics. In: International Conference on
Parallel Processing and Applied Mathematics, pp. 356–365
(2015). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-32149-3_34. Springer
55. Jansson, J., Krishnasamy, E., Leoni, M., Jansson, N., Hoffman, J.:
Time-resolved adaptive direct fem simulation of high-lift aircraft
conﬁgurations. In: Numerical Simulation of the Aerodynamics of
High-Lift Conﬁgurations, pp. 67–92. Springer, ??? (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-62136-4_5
56. Jansson, N., Hoffman, J., Nazarov, M.: Adaptive simulation of
turbulent ﬂow past a full car model. In: SC’11: Proceedings of
2011 International Conference for High Performance Computing,
Networking, Storage and Analysis, pp. 1–8 (2011). IEEE
57. Hoffman, J., Jansson, J., de Abreu, R.V., Degirmenci, N.C.,
Jansson, N., Mu¨ller, K., Nazarov, M., Spu¨hler, J.H.: Unicorn:
parallel adaptive ﬁnite element simulation of turbulent ﬂow and
ﬂuid-structure interaction for deforming domains and complex
geometry. Comput. Fluids 80, 310–319 (2013)
58. Integrated Performance Monitor (IPM): Integrated Performance
Monitor. Integrated Performance Monitor (IPM) (2021). http://
ipm-hpc.sourceforge.net/
59. Jansson, N.: A hybrid mpi?pgas approach to improve strong
scalability limits of ﬁnite element solvers. In: 2020 IEEE Inter-
national
Conference
on
Cluster
Computing
(CLUSTER),
pp. 303–313 (2020). IEEE
60. Kumar, S., Dalal, S., Dixit, V.: The osi model: overview on the
seven layers of computer networks. Int. J. Comput. Sci. Inf.
Technol. Res. 2(3), 461–466 (2014)
61. Shalev, L., Ayoub, H., Bshara, N., Sabbag, E.: A cloud-optimized
transport protocol for elastic and scalable hpc. IEEE Micro 40(6),
67–73 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1109/MM.2020.3016891
62. Amazon Web Services: AWS EC2 HPC6i Instance Types.
Amazon Web Services (2022). https://aws.amazon.com/es/ec2/
instance-types/hpc6i/
63. Amazon Web Services: New General Purpose, Compute Opti-
mized, and Memory Optimized Amazon EC2 Instances with
Higher Packet Processing Performance. Amazon Web Services.
https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/aws/new-general-purpose-com
pute-optimized-and-memory-optimized-amazon-ec2-instances-
with-higher-packet-processing-performance/
64. Azure HBv2-Series Virtual Machines. https://learn.microsoft.
com/en-us/azure/virtual-machines/hbv2-series
Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Tamara Dancheva
is a PhD.
student at the Basque Center for
Applied
Mathematics.
She
received her Master in Compu-
tational
Engineering
at
the
University of Strasbourg. She
holds a bachelor in Computer
Science and Engineering. Her
research focus is on computa-
tional
mechanics
and
HPC.
Within the frame of the H2020
ENABLE project she is working
on
enhancing
mechanical
behavior law mod els within an
HPC setting.
Unai Alonso Specialist in the
thermo-mechanical
modelling
of machining processes and has
taken part on several national
and international projects. His
recent work deals with machin-
ing of composites and titanium
alloys
produced
by
additive
manufacturing.
Moreover,
he
has
worked
in
the
research
center Ideko S.Coop and at the
Universities of Magdeburg and
the ENSAM in France.
Dr Michael Barton is currently
an Iker basque Research Asso-
ciate and Ramon & Cajal 2017
Research
Fellow
at
BCAM.
Prior joining BCAM, he was a
post-doctoral
fellow
at
JKU
Linz
(Austria),
Technion
(Israel), King Abdullah Univer-
sity of Science and Technology
KAUST (Saudi Arabia). He has
published over 50 peer reviewed
research articles. His research
spans numerical analysis, geo-
metric modelling and process-
ing,
and
approximation
and
rationalization of curved (NURBS objects.
2290
Cluster Computing (2024) 27:2273–2290
123
