Documentation
Amazon Elastic File System (EFS)
User Guide
On this page
Amazon Elastic File System (Amazon EFS) provides serverless, fully elastic file storage
so that you can share file data without provisioning or managing storage capacity and
performance. Amazon EFS is built to scale on demand to petabytes without
disrupting applications, growing and shrinking automatically as you add and remove
files. Because Amazon EFS has a simple web services interface, you can create and
configure file systems quickly and easily. The service manages all the file storage
infrastructure for you, meaning that you can avoid the complexity of deploying,
patching, and maintaining complex file system configurations.
Amazon EFS supports the Network File System version 4 (NFSv4.1 and NFSv4.0)
protocol, so the applications and tools that you use today work seamlessly with
Amazon EFS. Amazon EFS is accessible across most types of Amazon Web Services
compute instances, including Amazon EC2, Amazon ECS, Amazon EKS, AWS Lambda,
and AWS Fargate.
The service is designed to be highly scalable, highly available, and highly durable.
Amazon EFS offers the following file system types to meet your availability and
durability needs:
Regional (Recommended) – Regional file systems (recommended) store data
redundantly across multiple geographically separated Availability Zones within
the same AWS Region. Storing data across multiple Availability Zones provides
continuous availability to the data, even when one or more Availability Zones in
an AWS Region are unavailable.
One Zone – One Zone file systems store data within a single Availability Zone.
Storing data in a single Availability Zone provides continuous availability to the
What is Amazon Elastic File
System?
 PDF
 RSS
 Markdown
Focus mode
Contact Us
Feedback
English
Preferences 
Get started
Service guides
Developer tools
AI resources


data. In the unlikely case of the loss or damage to all or part of the Availability
Zone, however, data that is stored in these types of file systems might be lost.
For more information about file system types, see EFS file system types.
Amazon EFS provides the throughput, IOPS, and low latency needed for a broad
range of workloads. EFS file systems can grow to petabyte scale, drive high levels of
throughput, and allow massively parallel access from compute instances to your data.
For most workloads, we recommend using the default modes, which are the General
Purpose performance mode and the Elastic throughput modes.
General Purpose – The General Purpose performance mode is ideal for latency-
sensitive applications, like web-serving environments, content-management
systems, home directories, and general file serving.
Elastic – The Elastic throughput mode is designed to automatically scale
throughput performance up or down to meet the needs of your workload activity.
For more information about EFS performance and throughput modes, see Amazon
EFS performance specifications.
Amazon EFS provides file-system-access semantics, such as strong data consistency
and file locking. For more information, see Data consistency in Amazon EFS. Amazon
EFS also supports controlling access to your file systems through Portable Operating
System Interface (POSIX) permissions. For more information, see Securing your data
in Amazon EFS.
Amazon EFS supports authentication, authorization, and encryption capabilities to
help you meet your security and compliance requirements. Amazon EFS supports two
forms of encryption for file systems: encryption in transit and encryption at rest. You
can enable encryption at rest when creating an EFS file system. If you do, all of your
data and metadata is encrypted. You can enable encryption in transit when you
mount the file system. NFS client access to Amazon EFS is controlled by both AWS
Identity and Access Management (IAM) policies and network security policies, such as
security groups. For more information, see Data encryption in Amazon EFS, Identity
and access management for Amazon EFS, and Controlling network access to EFS file
systems for NFS clients.
Note
Using Amazon EFS with Microsoft Windows–based Amazon EC2 instances is
not supported.


If you are a first-time user of Amazon EFS, we recommend that you read the following
sections in order:
1. For an Amazon EFS product and pricing overview, see Amazon EFS
.
2. For an Amazon EFS technical overview, see How Amazon EFS works.
3. Try the Getting started exercise.
If you want to learn more about Amazon EFS, the following topics discuss the service
in greater detail:
Creating and managing EFS resources
Managing EFS file systems
Amazon EFS API
Did this page help you?
Provide feedback
Next topic: How it works
Are you a first-time user of Amazon EFS?
Yes
No
AWS Hands-On Tutorials 
AWS Solutions Library 
AWS Decision Guides 
Get Started
Choosing a generative AI service
AWS service guides
AWS CLI Tutorials on GitHub 
Service Guides
AWS Code Example Library
AWS CLI
AWS Builder Center 
AWS Developer Tools Blog 
Developer Tools
Download the AWS Docs MCP Server 
Sign into the AWS Console 
AWS re:Post 
Helpful Links
Top


Privacy
|
Site terms
|
Cookie preferences
|
 © 2026, Amazon Web Services, Inc. or its affiliates.
All rights reserved.
English
