Documentation
Amazon EC2
User Guide
On this page
Many general purpose workloads are on average not busy, and do not require a high
level of sustained CPU performance. The following graph illustrates the CPU
utilization for many common workloads that customers run in the AWS Cloud today.
These low-to-moderate CPU utilization workloads lead to wastage of CPU cycles and,
as a result, you pay for more than you use. To overcome this, you can leverage the
Burstable performance
instances
 PDF
 RSS
 Markdown
Focus mode
Contact Us
Feedback
English
Preferences 
Get started
Service guides
Developer tools
AI resources


low-cost burstable general purpose instances, which are the T instances.
The T instance family provides a baseline CPU performance with the ability to burst
above the baseline at any time for as long as required. The baseline CPU is defined to
meet the needs of the majority of general purpose workloads, including large-scale
micro-services, web servers, small and medium databases, data logging, code
repositories, virtual desktops, development and test environments, and business-
critical applications. The T instances offer a balance of compute, memory, and
network resources, and provide you with the most cost-effective way to run a broad
spectrum of general purpose applications that have a low-to-moderate CPU usage.
They can save you up to 15% in costs when compared to M instances, and can lead to
even more cost savings with smaller, more economical instance sizes, offering as low
as 2 vCPUs and 0.5 GiB of memory. The smaller T instance sizes, such as nano, micro,
small, and medium, are well suited for workloads that need a small amount of
memory and do not expect high CPU usage.
Note
This topic describes burstable CPU. For information about burstable
network performance, see Amazon EC2 instance network bandwidth.
The EC2 burstable instances consist of T4g, T3a, and T3 instance types, and the
previous generation T2 instance types.
The T4g instance types are the latest generation of burstable instances. They provide
the best price for performance, and provide you with the lowest cost of all the EC2
instance types. The T4g instance types are powered by Arm-based AWS Graviton2
processors with extensive ecosystem support from operating systems vendors,
independent software vendors, and popular AWS services and applications.
The following table summarizes the key differences between the burstable instance
types.
EC2 burstable instance types
Latest generation
T4g
Lowest cost EC2 instance type with up to
40% higher price/performance and 20%
lower costs vs T3
AWS Graviton2
processors with Arm
Neoverse N1 cores
Type
Description
Processor family


Type
Description
Processor family
For information about instance pricing and additional specifications, see Amazon EC2
Pricing
 and Amazon EC2 Instance Types
. For information about burstable
network performance, see Amazon EC2 instance network bandwidth.
If your created your AWS account before July 15, 2025 and it's less than 12 months
old, you can use a t2.micro  instance for free (or a t3.micro  instance in Regions
where t2.micro  is unavailable) within certain usage limits. If you created your AWS
account on or after July 15, 2025, you can use t3.micro , t3.small , t4g.micro ,
t4g.small  instance types for 6 months or until your credits are used up. For more
information, see AWS Free Tier
.
Supported purchasing options for T instances
On-Demand Instances
Reserved Instances
Dedicated Instances (T3 only)
Dedicated Hosts (T3 only, in standard  mode only)
Spot Instances
For more information, see Amazon EC2 billing and purchasing options.
Contents
Best practices
Key concepts for burstable performance instances
Unlimited mode for burstable performance instances
Standard mode for burstable performance instances
Configure burstable performance instances
T3a
Lowest cost x86-based instances with 10%
lower costs vs T3 instances
AMD 1st gen EPYC
processors
T3
Best peak price/performance for x86
workloads with up to 30% lower
price/performance vs previous generation
T2 instances
Intel Xeon Scalable
(Skylake, Cascade
Lake processors)
Previous generation
T2
Previous generation burstable instances
Intel Xeon
processors


Monitor CPU credits for burstable instances
Follow these best practices to get the maximum benefit from burstable performance
instances.
Ensure that the instance size you choose passes the minimum memory
requirements of your operating system and applications. Operating systems with
graphical user interfaces that consume significant memory and CPU resources (for
example, Windows) might require a t3.micro  or larger instance size for many
use cases. As the memory and CPU requirements of your workload grow over
time, you have the flexibility with the T instances to scale to larger instance sizes
of the same instance type, or to select another instance type.
Enable AWS Compute Optimizer
 for your account and review the Compute
Optimizer recommendations for your workload. Compute Optimizer can help
assess whether instances should be upsized to improve performance or
downsized for cost savings. Compute Optimizer may also recommend a different
instance type based on your scenario. For more information, see Viewing EC2
instance recommendations in the AWS Compute Optimizer User Guide.
Related resources
Amazon EC2 Instance Types Guide
Amazon EBS User Guide
Amazon EC2 Developer Guide
Did this page help you?
Provide feedback
Next topic: Key concepts
Previous topic: Troubleshoot
Best practices
Yes
No


Privacy
|
Site terms
|
Cookie preferences
|
 © 2026, Amazon Web Services, Inc. or its affiliates.
All rights reserved.
AWS Hands-On Tutorials 
AWS Solutions Library 
AWS Decision Guides 
Get Started
Choosing a generative AI service
AWS service guides
AWS CLI Tutorials on GitHub 
Service Guides
AWS Code Example Library
AWS CLI
AWS Builder Center 
AWS Developer Tools Blog 
Developer Tools
Download the AWS Docs MCP Server 
Sign into the AWS Console 
AWS re:Post 
Helpful Links
English
Top
