AWS Compute Blog
New Amazon EC2 Spot pricing model: Simpliﬁed purchasing
without bidding and fewer interruptions
by Roshni Pary | on 13 MAR 2018 | Permalink |  Share
Contributed by Deepthi Chelupati and Roshni Pary
Amazon EC2 Spot Instances oﬀer spare compute capacity in the AWS Cloud at steep discounts. Customers—
including Yelp, NASA JPL, FINRA, and Autodesk—use Spot Instances to reduce costs and get faster results.
Spot Instances provide acceleration, scale, and deep cost savings to big data workloads, containerized
applications such as web services, test/dev, and many types of HPC and batch jobs.
At re:Invent 2017, we launched a new pricing model that simpliﬁed the Spot purchasing experience. The new
model gives you predictable prices that adjust slowly over days and weeks, with typical savings of 70-90%
over On-Demand. With the previous pricing model, some of you had to invest time and eﬀort to analyze
historical prices to determine your bidding strategy and maximum bid price. Not anymore.
How does the new pricing model work?
You don’t have to bid for Spot Instances in the new pricing model, and you just pay the Spot price that’s in
eﬀect for the current hour for the instances that you launch. It’s that simple. Now you can request Spot
capacity just like you would request On-Demand capacity, without having to spend time analyzing market
prices or setting a maximum bid price.
Previously, Spot Instances were terminated in ascending order of bids, and the Spot price was set to the
highest unfulﬁlled bid. The market prices ﬂuctuated frequently because of this. In the new model, the Spot
prices are more predictable, updated less frequently, and are determined by supply and demand for Amazon
EC2 spare capacity, not bid prices. You can ﬁnd the price that’s in eﬀect for the current hour in the EC2
console.
New Amazon EC2 Spot pricing model: Simplified...
https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/compute/new-amaz...
1 of 3
6/10/26, 16:03


As you can see from the above Spot Instance Pricing History graph (available in the EC2 console under Spot
Requests), Spot prices were volatile before the pricing model update. However, after the pricing model
update, prices are more predictable and change less frequently.
In the new model, you still have the option to further control costs by submitting a “maximum price” that you
are willing to pay in the console when you request Spot Instances:
You can also set your maximum price in EC2 RunInstances or RequestSpotFleet API calls, or in command line
requests:
The default maximum price is the On-Demand price and you can continue to set a maximum Spot price of up
to 10x the On-Demand price. That means, if you have been running applications on Spot Instances and use
the RequestSpotInstances or RequestSpotFleet operations, you can continue to do so. The new Spot pricing
model is backward compatible and you do not need to make any changes to your existing applications.
Fewer interruptions
Spot Instances receive a two-minute interruption notice when these instances are about to be reclaimed by
EC2, because EC2 needs the capacity back. We have signiﬁcantly reduced the interruptions with the new
pricing model. Now instances are not interrupted because of higher competing bids, and you can enjoy longer
workload runtimes. The typical frequency of interruption for Spot Instances in the last 30 days was less than
5% on average.
To reduce the impact of interruptions and optimize Spot Instances, diversify and run your application across
multiple capacity pools. Each instance family, each instance size, in each Availability Zone, in every Region is a
separate Spot pool. You can use the RequestSpotFleet API operation to launch thousands of Spot Instances
and diversify resources automatically. To further reduce the impact of interruptions, you can also set up Spot
Instances and Spot Fleets to respond to an interruption notice by stopping or hibernating rather than
terminating instances when capacity is no longer available.
Spot Instances are now available in 18 Regions and 51 Availability Zones, and oﬀer 100s of instance options.
aws ec2 run-instances --instance-market-options
'{"MarketType":"spot", "SpotOptions": {"MaxPrice": "0.12"}}' \
 --image-id ami-1a2b3c4d --count 1 --instance-type c3.large
New Amazon EC2 Spot pricing model: Simplified...
https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/compute/new-amaz...
2 of 3
6/10/26, 16:03


We have eliminated bidding, simpliﬁed the pricing model, and have made it easy to get started with Amazon
EC2 Spot Instances for you to take advantage of the largest pool of cost-eﬀective compute capacity in the
world. See the Spot Instances detail page for more information and create your Spot Instance here.
TAGS: Amazon EC2, Amazon EC2 Spot, Amazon EC2 Spot Instances, spot
New Amazon EC2 Spot pricing model: Simplified...
https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/compute/new-amaz...
3 of 3
6/10/26, 16:03
