Documentation
Amazon EC2
User Guide
On this page
A Spot Instance interruption notice is a warning that is issued two minutes before
Amazon EC2 stops or terminates your Spot Instance. If you specify hibernation as the
interruption behavior, you receive an interruption notice, but you do not receive a
two-minute warning because the hibernation process begins immediately.
The best way for you to gracefully handle Spot Instance interruptions is to architect
your application to be fault-tolerant. To accomplish this, you can take advantage of
Spot Instance interruption notices. We recommend that you check for these
interruption notices every 5 seconds.
The interruption notices are made available as an EventBridge event and as items in
the instance metadata on the Spot Instance. Interruption notices are emitted on a
best effort basis.
When Amazon EC2 is going to interrupt your Spot Instance, it emits an event two
minutes prior to the actual interruption (except for hibernation, which gets the
interruption notice, but not two minutes in advance, because hibernation begins
immediately). This event can be detected by Amazon EventBridge. For more
information about EventBridge events, see the Amazon EventBridge User Guide. For a
detailed example that walks you through how to create and use event rules, see
Taking Advantage of Amazon EC2 Spot Instance Interruption Notices
.
The following is an example of the event for Spot Instance interruption. The possible
Spot Instance interruption
notices
 PDF
 RSS
 Markdown
Focus mode
EC2 Spot Instance Interruption Warning event
Contact Us
Feedback
English
Preferences 
Get started
Service guides
Developer tools
AI resources


values for instance-action  are hibernate , stop , or terminate .
Note
The ARN format of the Spot Instance interruption event is
arn:aws:ec2: availability-zone :instance/ instance-id . This format
differs from the EC2 resource ARN format.
The instance-action  item specifies the action and the approximate time, in UTC,
when the action will occur.
If your Spot Instance is marked to be stopped or terminated by Amazon EC2, the
instance-action  item is present in your instance metadata. Otherwise, it is not
present. You can retrieve the instance-action  using Instance Metadata Service
Version 2 (IMDSv2) as follows.
{
    "version": "0",
    "id": "12345678-1234-1234-1234-123456789012",
    "detail-type": "EC2 Spot Instance Interruption Warning",
    "source": "aws.ec2",
    "account": "123456789012",
    "time": "yyyy-mm-ddThh:mm:ssZ",
    "region": "us-east-2",
    "resources": ["arn:aws:ec2:us-east-2a:instance/i-1234567890abcdef
    "detail": {
        "instance-id": "i-1234567890abcdef0",
        "instance-action": "action"
    }
}
instance-action
Linux
Windows
TOKEN=`curl -X PUT "http://169.254.169.254/latest/api/token" -H 


The following example output indicates the time at which this instance will be
stopped.
The following example output indicates the time at which this instance will be
terminated.
If Amazon EC2 is not preparing to stop or terminate the instance, or if you terminated
the instance yourself, instance-action  is not present in the instance metadata and
you receive an HTTP 404 error when you try to retrieve it.
The termination-time  item specifies the approximate time in UTC when the
instance will receive the shutdown signal.
Note
This item is maintained for backward compatibility; you should use
instance-action  instead.
If your Spot Instance is marked for termination by Amazon EC2 (either due to a Spot
Instance interruption where the interruption behavior is set to terminate , or due to
the cancellation of a persistent Spot Instance request), the termination-time  item
is present in your instance metadata. Otherwise, it is not present. You can retrieve the
termination-time  using IMDSv2 as follows.
    && curl -H "X-aws-ec2-metadata-token: $TOKEN" http://169.254
{"action": "stop", "time": "2017-09-18T08:22:00Z"}
{"action": "terminate", "time": "2017-09-18T08:22:00Z"}
termination-time
Linux
Windows


The following is example output.
If Amazon EC2 is not preparing to terminate the instance (either because there is no
Spot Instance interruption or because your interruption behavior is set to stop  or
hibernate ), or if you terminated the Spot Instance yourself, the termination-time
item is either not present in the instance metadata (so you receive an HTTP 404 error)
or contains a value that is not a time value.
If Amazon EC2 fails to terminate the instance, the request status is set to fulfilled .
The termination-time  value remains in the instance metadata with the original
approximate time, which is now in the past.
Related resources
Amazon EC2 Instance Types Guide
Amazon EBS User Guide
Amazon EC2 Developer Guide
Did this page help you?
Provide feedback
Next topic: Find interrupted Spot Instances
Previous topic: Initiate an interruption
TOKEN=`curl -X PUT "http://169.254.169.254/latest/api/token" -H 
if curl -H "X-aws-ec2-metadata-token: $TOKEN" -s http://169.254.
2015-01-05T18:02:00Z
Yes
No


Privacy
|
Site terms
|
Cookie preferences
|
 © 2026, Amazon Web Services, Inc. or its affiliates.
All rights reserved.
AWS Hands-On Tutorials 
AWS Solutions Library 
AWS Decision Guides 
Get Started
Choosing a generative AI service
AWS service guides
AWS CLI Tutorials on GitHub 
Service Guides
AWS Code Example Library
AWS CLI
AWS Builder Center 
AWS Developer Tools Blog 
Developer Tools
Download the AWS Docs MCP Server 
Sign into the AWS Console 
AWS re:Post 
Helpful Links
English
Top
