N. Meghanathan et al. (Eds.): Advances in Computing & Inform. Technology, AISC 176, pp. 729–737. 
springerlink.com                                                                      © Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2012 
Load Balancing in Cluster Using BLCR 
Checkpoint/Restart 
Hemant Hariyale, Manu Vardhan, Ankit Pandey, Ankit Mishra,  
and Dharmender Singh Kushwaha  
Motilal Nehru National Institute of Technology Allahabad 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
Allahabad-211004, U. P., India 
{cs1010,rcs1002,it088003,it088015,dsk}@mnnit.ac.in 
Abstract. Modern computation is becoming complex in a way that the resource 
requirement is gradually increasing. High Throughput Computing is one 
technique to deal with such a complexity. After a significant amount of time, 
computing clusters gets highly overloaded resulting in degradation of 
performance. Since there is no central coordinator in Computer Supported 
Cooperative Working (CSCW) load-balancing is more complex. An overloaded 
node does not participate in a CSCW network as they are already overloaded. 
This paper proposes migration of computation intensive jobs from overloaded 
nodes, which will allow overloaded nodes to be able to participate in CSCW. 
The proposed solution improves the performance by making more nodes 
participating in CSCW by migrating compute intensive jobs from overloaded 
nodes to underloaded nodes. Evaluation of proposed approach shows that the 
availability and performance of the CSCW clusters is improved by 30%-40% 
with fault-tolerance based load balancing.  
Keywords: Checkpoint/Restart, CSCW, Fault Tolerance, Job Migration, Load 
Balancing.  
1   Introduction 
Computer Assisted Cooperative Working is concept, in which a group of computer 
nodes participate to share services, computational workload and perform compute 
intensive jobs cooperatively. Cluster computing is becoming more popular these days 
and the prime reason for that is high availability, more reliability and more efficient 
computing. Checkpoint/Restart is a technique of storing the state of process at 
particular intervals. If the process fails at some point of time, previously stored 
process states can be used to restart the process from the last stable state. Storing the 
state of a running process i.e. process id, register values, stack pointer etc. in a file 
known as context or checkpoint file is known as creating a checkpoint. 
Checkpointing/Restart allows starting a job from the most recent stable running state 
saving a lot of computational time and reducing response time of crashed jobs in 
overloaded conditions. Berkley Lab Checkpoint/Restart (BLCR) is an open source 


730 
H. Hariyale et al. 
checkpointing and restart utility for Linux clusters that targets the space of typical 
High Performance Computing applications (HPC) developed at Computational 
Research Division, Ernest Orlando Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. 
Cluster is a group of computers interconnected for providing efficient computation 
for High Throughput Computation (HPC) application. Balancing load for achieving 
optimal performance forces the job migration. Job migration is termination of job on 
the overloaded CPU and restarting it on a underloaded or idle CPU. Since a CSCW 
does not have a central controller or coordinator, balancing load in such situations is 
more complex and needs to be done in decentralized manner. Migration of job 
requires transfer of files required for restarting a job on new node. Due to increasing 
complexity, requirements of computational intensive jobs, the possibility that the 
process may fail during the course its execution will increase. 
 
 
Fig. 1. Architecture 
Figure 1 shows three clusters, each having a cluster head. Each cluster head 
manages some node locally. If one of the cluster head fails because of overloading, all 
the nodes in its cluster zone will not be able to participate in computer supported 
cooperative working. Job migration helps in handling issues related to fault tolerance 
for critical processes as well as for balancing the load among the nodes of cluster. In 
all job migration improves availability of cluster node in CSCW. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section discusses the related 
work done in the context of job migration, checkpointing and load balancing. Section 3 
discusses the proposed work. In section 4 performance evaluation is performed which is 
followed by conclusion in section 5. 
