2020 10th International Symposium on Telecommunications (IST'2020) 
978-1-7281-8012-0/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE 
A  Reliability Aware Algorithm for Workflow 
Scheduling on Cloud Spot Instances Using Artificial 
Neural Network 
 
Hoda Ghavamipoor  
New Media Department 
Cyberspace Research Center 
Tehran, Iran 
h.ghavamipoor@aut.ac.ir 
Sayyed Ali Kianian Mousavi      Hamid Reza Faragardi 
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department
KTH Royal Institute of Technology 
Stockholm, Sweden 
sakm2@kth.se           hrfa@kth.se 
Nayereh Rasouli 
Department of Computer Engineering 
University of Science and Culture 
Tehran, Iran 
n.rasouli@usc.ac.ir 
 
Abstract—IT infrastructures are rapidly growing due to the 
increased demand for computing power used by applications. 
Furthermore, modern cloud data centers are hosting various 
advanced applications based on the user's needs. The goal of 
this paper is to maximize the reliability of running workflow 
applications considering spot instances revocation without 
imposing fault-tolerance overhead. For this purpose, we use an 
Artificial Neural Network algorithm (ANN) to define a failure 
prediction module for the cloud spot instances. Indeed, we 
introduce a novel workflow scheduling algorithm, named 
Reliability Aware and modified HEFT (Heterogeneous Earliest 
Finish Time) for minimizing the makespan of a given workflow 
subject to a specified reliability of the application. To evaluate 
our ANN based prediction model, we have used a 
benchmarking data set. The results of the model training 
demonstrate that the prediction accuracy is about 96 percent. 
Our experiments illustrate that although makespan does not 
improve significantly in all experiments, an acceptable level of 
reliability is achieved. 
Keywords—cloud 
computing, 
spot 
instances, 
machine 
learning, workflow scheduling, reliability. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Cloud computing is the delivery of on-demand computing 
services, from applications to storage and processing power, 
typically over the Internet and on a pay-as-you-go basis. It can 
run applications with high flexibility, scalability, and 
availability with economical pricing for cloud users[1]. They 
only need a remote connection to a cloud data center to run their 
workloads on the variety of its servers. According to the ability 
to build flexible and sophisticated applications, each user 
application service is expressed in a workflow. A cloud 
workflow system is a type of platform service that aids the 
automation of distributed applications based on the cloud 
infrastructure[2]. 
Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) offers elastic 
resources based on customer demands which can be provisioned 
immediately even if the system is overloaded [3]. However, 
when its computing resources are under-provisioned, EC2 can 
rent spare compute capacity as Amazon EC2 spot instances at 
steep discounts (up to a 90% discount) compared to On-Demand 
instances [4] based on an auction bidding mechanism. Spot 
Instances are utilized for various stateless, fault-tolerant, or 
flexible applications such as big data, containerized workloads, 
CI/CD, web servers, high-performance computing (HPC), and 
other test and development workloads. The trade-off for cheaper 
prices of spot instances is based on the fact that the SLA is not 
guaranteed for these resources and they may not always be 
available. In the situation that the current spot instance price is 
greater than the customer’s bid price or in the case that the 
Amazon EC2 is faced with a lack of on-demand resources, the 
customer’s spot instance is revoked. Therefore, reliability is a 
challenge for customers when they want to choose spot instances 
for the execution of their tasks. To overcome this challenge, 
some solutions are proposed in previous studies with different 
approaches. The first approach is using fault-tolerant 
scheduling. These algorithms are used in a hybrid set of spot 
instances and on-demand cloud resources to mitigate the 
reliability risk by utilizing a kind of redundancy mechanism [5]. 
These models can minimize or even eliminate the lost work for 
spot instances revocations. However, they incur additional 
overhead related to application completion time (which can lead 
to time penalty costs) as well as deployment cost. This, in turn, 
can be at odds with the main purpose of using spot instances, 
which is cost reduction. 
In recent years, to get rid of the overhead of employing fault-
tolerance mechanisms, another approach is proposed in some 
papers which tends to overcome the reliability challenge using 
the spot instance failure probability prediction. These studies 
were frequently utilized constant failure rates to schedule 
workflows based on heuristic algorithms. 
In this paper, a machine learning-based failure prediction 
model for spot instances is proposed which aims more 


 
 
accurately and intelligently to estimate the probability of task 
completion on each spot instance type before the task 
assignment. Furthermore, a scheduling algorithm entitled “RA-
HEFT” (Reliability Aware Heterogeneous Earliest Finish 
Time), a modified version of the original HEFT algorithm [6] is 
proposed. RA-HEFT algorithm utilizes the proposed predictor 
to optimize the makespan of workflows considering a minimum 
ensured reliability rate. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: previous works 
are discussed in Section 2.  A prediction for solving spot instance 
revocations problem by using an artificial neural network is 
discussed in Section 3. In section 4, the workflow scheduling 
algorithm (RA-HEFT) is proposed. The evaluation of the 
proposed method is presented in Section 5. The conclusions are 
given in Section 6. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
In cloud systems, spot instances can be revoked at any time, 
creating uncertainty about task completion times. To tackle this 
unreliable situation, researchers investigate fault tolerance 
criteria by focusing on various methods such as replication [8], 
checkpointing [5], [2], and VM migration [8] as we review some 
previous studies focusing on these various areas. Wu et al. [10] 
represented a dynamic fault-tolerant workflow scheduling 
method with hybrid spatial and temporal re-execution schemes. 
Farid et al. [11] represented a solution for the scheduling 
scientific workflow problem with a new multi-objective 
scheduling algorithm. Fuzzy resource utilization based on the 
swarm optimization method was proposed. Poola et al. [6] 
presented an adaptive just-in-time scheduling algorithm for 
scientific workflows, which was fault-tolerant against 
performance variations, out-of-bid failures, and resource 
failures for clouds. Martinez et al. [12] organized the Markov 
decision process of workflows in cloud environments to 
minimize the monetary cost while being subject to timeliness 
constraints and looked up for the optimal policy taking into 
account the user preferences in time and cost.  
As we mentioned, the conventional approaches for fault 
tolerance rely on checkpointing restart mechanisms, which 
periodically save a snapshot of a system to stable storage and 
use it to recover the system from failures so based on the 
dynamic environment of the cloud system, these methods cannot 
solve the issue instead using machine learning techniques for 
predictions are addressed in [13]. In [14], Ragmani et al. tried to 
find the more accurate machine learning algorithm namely an 
artificial neural network model for defining a failure prediction 
module for cloud architectures. Mishra et al. [15] presented 
machine learning techniques for predicting the spot price to 
facilitate the users in bidding. According to the experimental 
results, reliability and reduce the cost of computing on VM 
instances were improved.  
Reducing the effect of spot instance revocations without 
using the fault tolerance technique, which imposes an extra 
overhead to the system, increases the deployment and user costs, 
is already addressed by a few research works such as in [16], 
Alourani et al. introduced a cloud market-based method that 
leverages cloud spot market features to provision spot instances 
without engaging fault-tolerant mechanisms to diminish the 
deployment cost and completion time of applications. Pham et 
al. [17] explained the life cycle of SIs and described the most 
relevant events that might interrupt a user from obtaining SIs. 
They revealed that the SI interruption rate was able to influence 
the fulfillment rate. Their method was evaluated on real EC2 
cloud experiments. 
III. THE FAILURE PERDITION MODEL 
In this section, a feed-forward neural network is trained to 
extract the failure prediction model. We utilize a benchmark 
data set [17] which includes 3840 spot requests organized in 
experiments each of which invokes 16 requests to the same SI 
type. Those 16 requests have been sub-divided into 4 different 
workloads and bid prices. The steps of model derivation are as 
follows: 
In the first step, necessary fields for our dataset are identified 
and the rest of the fields are removed before further processing. 
The fields that are used in this research from spot instance 
allocation history data, are: Instance creation time, Instance 
types (there are 4 types of instances in the mentioned data set 
[17], Instance price which means the customer bidding price, the 
Execution time of the task, and, the Instance status field. The 
Instance status indicates the fulfillment/failure of the task. 
Table 1. The structure of input data 
Instance 
creation time 
Instance 
type 
Instance 
price 
Execution 
time 
Instance 
status 
  
The data is cleaned to make the dataset more consistent and 
expressive. Records with very low execution times (<5s) 
referring to the creation of the instances are removed. Moreover, 
instances that are canceled by the user are also removed from 
the dataset because they are not canceled by the cloud’s 
provider, so, we cannot say whether that instance completes 
successfully or fail. 
In the next step, the string messages in records are replaced 
with appropriate numbers for quantification purposes. The string 
version of instance types is replaced with the number of VCPU 
each instance type has according to the specification sheet 
provided by Amazon EC2 cloud provider. A multiplier of 1.2 is 
also applied to generation 5 instances since, according to the 
Amazon cloud, the 5th generation of instances is about 20% 
faster compared to generation 3 and 4. A string version of 
instance status is replaced with 1 for failure and 2 for success. 
The Execution time is calculated as the seconds of difference 
between the first created instance in the dataset and the current 
record. The resulting dataset consisted of 2209 records. With 
1743 recording indicating failure and 416 records indicating 
success. 
The failure and success instances are separated, shuffled, and 
then distributed into two sets of training and test in a 75/25 ratio, 
maintaining the distribution of failed and succeeded numbers in 
two sets. The resulting dataset is fed into a simple 3-layer neural 
network with the following structure (fig. 1).  


 
 
 
Fig 1.The structure of the failure prediction neural 
network 
           
The resulting neural network is then trained using Bayesian 
regulation for 1000 epochs. The results of the training are shown 
in Fig. 2. 
 
Fig 2. The resulted confusion matrices 
  
The top training confusion matrix shows the number of false 
positives (2.4%), false negatives (1.0%) as well as the total 
accuracy (96.6%) on training data. In the test set, the rate of the 
false positive and false negative is 4.8% and 2.3% accordingly, 
our accuracy in the test set, and the total dataset is 92.9% and 
96.1% accordingly. 
The neural network performance chart, as shown in Fig. 3, 
is flattened regarding test error. Indicating that the network has 
already achieved optimal performance. 
  
 
Fig 3. The neural network performance chart 
In this step, our failure prediction model is extracted and it 
will be embedded in the RA-HEFT algorithm in the next section. 
IV. THE RA-HEFT ALGORITHM 
To schedule the workflow in cloud systems a variety of 
algorithms were proposed in the literature. One of the most 
popular ones is the HEFT algorithm [6]. In this section, the RA-
HEFT algorithm, a modified version of the HEFT algorithm, is 
proposed.  
RA-HEFT decides to allocate workflow tasks to processors 
based on whether the neural network predicts its successful 
execution. Algorithm 1 shows the pseudo-code of the proposed 
algorithm. Each task in the pseudocode includes it’s starting 
time, execution time as well as it’s instance requirement. 
 
Algorithm 1: The RA-HEFT algorithm
1.
Compute ranku of each task according to the HEFT 
algorithm. 
2. 
Train neural network net(pk, Sk) with the dataset to 
approximate failure rate of each instance type relative to 
required reservation time. 
3. 
while there is an unscheduled task in the list do 
4. 
    select the first task ti with the highest rank.  
5. 
        for each processor pk in cluster set (pk in Q) do 
6. 
            compute EFT(ti,pk) and EST(ti,pk) value with  
            insertion-based scheduling policy 
7. 
            Predict net(pk, EFT(ti,pk), EST(ti,pk)) to  
            approximate whether the task will be run 
successfully in the current processor. 
8. 
    if there is a processor with the successful execution 
9. 
        Assign ti to pj with minimum EFT and successful  
        execution prediction. 
10.         Remove task ti from the pool. 


 
 
11.
   Else
12.        if the instance can get smaller  
13.             half the instance requirement of ti 
14. 
                double ti execution time  
15.             do not assign it to any processors so that it  
        would be reselected in the loop. 
16.        Else 
17.             add constant delay time d 
18.             Set instance requirement back to full 
19.        End if 
20. End if 
21.  
22. End while  
 
In the first step, the RA-HEFT algorithm computes the 
upward ranking of each task recursively as follows: 
	 = 
 +
max
∈	, + 	 
Where ti represents ith task, 
  represents average 
computation time of the task among all processors, child(ti) 
represents children tasks of task ti, and ci,j represents the 
communication cost(time needed for data transfer) between task 
i and j. 
Following the HEFT computation of upward ranking, RA-
HEFT trains a copy of the neural network for each processor 
with the given dataset, which is partitioned per region for each 
processor. 
In the final step, each task is scheduled to its corresponding 
processor according to its rank, in a similar fashion to HEFT. 
But, unlike classical HEFT, the prediction of the neural network 
corresponding to the processor being scheduled is also taken into 
consideration, if the prediction fails, the task allocation is 
repeated with smaller instances and longer execution time. If 
that also fails, a constant delay time d is added. For this work, d 
is set to 1 second for precision purposes. 
V. EVALUATION 
 
To evaluate the proposed scheduling algorithm, both HEFT 
and RA-HEFT algorithms, as well as a third ReplicateAll 
algorithm for reference purposes are simulated using Java 
workflowsim [19]. ReplicateAll algorithm is an algorithm that 
runs every task in the step simultaneously on all processors, and 
the result of the first successful processor is taken as the result 
for the next step calculation. The simulation environment has 
two cloud clusters. Each cluster has a failure function generated 
from fitting an extreme value probability distribution to our 
observed timelines that the instances were terminated.  
The inspiral-30 example from the Pegasus workflow 
generation framework[20] is considered as the input of 
scheduling algorithms. Four test cases were done using the 
HEFT, RA-HEFT, and ReplicateAll [21] scheduling algorithms 
from the Pegasus workflow generator. To run the scheduling 
algorithms, according to the input data structure of the HEFT 
algorithm [6] the input data set of tasks, represented as the 
following directed acyclic graph (Fig. 4) . In the given data the 
execution time of each task on each spot instance type and the 
times to communicate the results from each job to each of its 
children are determined.  
 
 
 
 
Fig 4. The input workflow graph 
Then the HEFT. RA-HEFT and ReplicateAll are applied to 
the given data set. The results makespan of each algorithm is 
provided in Table 2. 
 
The following table shows the total execution time of each 
scheduling algorithm in each predefined test case in the Pegasus 
workflow framework. The table shows the computed ideal 
predicted makespan of each algorithm as well as the actual 
makespan in workflowsim simulated cloud environment. The 
additional description in each cell in simulation columns shows 
the number of errors that happened in simulation as well as the 
tasks that were failed due to the termination of the process.  
 
Table 2. The resulting predicted and actual simulated Makespan for HEFT 
and RA-HEFT  
Test Case/ 
Algorithm 
HEFT 
Computed/Sim
ulated 
RA-HEFT 
Computed/ 
Simulated 
ReplicateAll 
Computed/ 
Simulated 
Inspiral 30 
16052/18619(2 
errors, at tasks 7, 
26) 
19146/19146(0 
errors) 
30087/30087(
4 errors, at 
tasks 7, 26, 
27x2) 
Inspiral 50 
25332/30598(3 
errors, at tasks 
14, 18, 47) 
32159/32159(0 
errors) 
52673/526732
(4 errors, at 
tasks 14, 18, 
47, 48) 
SIPHT 30 
19599/19599(1 
error, at task 19) 
19599/19599(0 
errors) 
44103/44103(
0 errors) 
Montage 50 
1055/1055(0 
errors) 
1106/1106(0 
errors) 
4150/4150(0 
errors) 
 
VI. CONCLUSION  AND FUTURE WORKS 
In this paper, we have proposed an enhanced version of 
HEFT algorithm, which also used neural network to improve the 


 
 
reliability of workflow scheduling on unstable, volatile cloud 
resources especially Amazon EC2 Spot instances. 
We have trained a neural network based on a failure and 
successful execution dataset on Amazon EC2 Spot instances. 
Then the trained model have been used in the proposed RA-
HEFT algorithm to predict the successful execution of each task 
on the chosen instances. Since the RA-HEFT assigns tasks only 
to the reliable instances that are expected to be able to run the 
workflow successfully, the workflow scheduling generated by 
the RA-HEFT algorithm is potentially more reliable than what 
is provided by the original HEFT. 
 The RA-HEFT generated schedule was then tested against 
the scheduling of the original HEFT in the workflowsim 
environment to evaluate the resulting simulated execution time 
as well as the resulting reliability for each scheduling algorithm. 
As shown in the test cases, although HEFT is theoretically 
5% faster than RA-HEFT in terms of the makespan of the given 
workflow, in practice it might be dramatically worse since the 
chosen spot instances are more unreliable which may lead to 
failure and need to re-execute the workflow multiple times. On 
the other hand, ReplicateAll is a demanding algorithm that 
performs twice as worse as the HEFT algorithm but its 
makespan is noticeably more predictable and accurate. As the 
calculation complexity and cumulative execution time of nodes 
did not change, this means that the additional time spent in 
HEFT and ReplicateAll for retries and redundancy was time 
wasted on a functioning VM. In other words, while the observed 
busy time of clusters seems to be shorter, the accumulation of 
busy times for both clusters indicate that we actually have spent 
more time using the instances, resulting in higher cost compared 
to RA-HEFT. 
Possible future work involves considering the instance cost 
for each specified resources assignment and optimization the 
total cost of workflow scheduling in addition to the time and 
reliability rate. 
  
VII. REFERENCES 
[1] J. P. Ara_ujo Neto, D. M. Pianto, and C. G. Ralha, “Towards increasing 
reliability of amazon ec2 spot instances with a fault-tolerant multi-agent 
architecture," Multiagent and Grid Systems, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 259-287, 
2019. 
[2] Wu, Zhangjun, Zhiwei Ni, Lichuan Gu, and Xiao Liu. "A revised discrete 
particle swarm optimization for cloud workflow scheduling." In 2010 
International Conference on Computational Intelligence and Security, pp. 
184-188. IEEE, 2010. 
[3] Jung, D., Chan, S., Chung, K.S. and Yu, H., “VM migration for fault 
tolerance in spot instance-based cloud computing,” In International 
Conference on Grid and Pervasive Computing Springer, Berlin, 
Heidelberg, 2013, May, pp. 142-151. 
[4] Poola, Deepak, Kotagiri Ramamohanarao, and Rajkumar Buyya. "Fault-
tolerant Workflow Scheduling using Spot Instances on Clouds." In ICCS, 
pp. 523-533. 2014. 
[5] A. R. Setlur, S. J. Nirmala, H. S. Singh, and S. Khoriya, “An efficient 
fault-tolerant workflow scheduling approach using replication heuristics 
and checkpointing in the cloud," Journal of Parallel and Distributed 
Computing, vol. 136, pp. 14, 28, 2020. 
[6] H. Topcuoglu, S. Hariri, and M.-y. Wu, “Performance-effective and 
low-complexity task scheduling for heterogeneous computing,” IEEE 
transactions on parallel and distributed systems, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 260–
274, 2002. 
[7] D. Poola, K. Ramamohanarao, and R. Buyya, “Enhancing the reliability 
of workflow execution using task replication and spot instances," ACM 
Transactions on Autonomous and Adaptive Systems (TAAS), vol. 10, no. 
4, pp. 1. 21, 2016. 
[8] M. Damodhar and S. Poojitha, “An adaptive fault reduction scheme to 
provide reliable cloud computing environment," vol. 19, pp. 64. 73, 2017. 
[9] L. Teylo, L. Arantes, P. Sens, and L. M. d. A. Drummond, “A bag-of-
tasks scheduler tolerant to temporal failures in clouds," in 2019 31st 
International Symposium on Computer Architecture and High-
Performance Computing (SBAC-PAD), pp. 144-151, IEEE, 2019. 
[10] N. Wu, D. Zuo, and Z. Zhang, “Dynamic fault-tolerant workflow 
scheduling with hybrid spatial-temporal re-execution in clouds," 
Information, vol. 10, no. 5, p. 169, 2019. 
[11] M. Farid, R. Latip, M. Hussin, and N. A. W. A. Hamid, “Scheduling 
scientific workflow using the multi-objective algorithm with fuzzy 
resource utilization in a multi-cloud environment," IEEE Access, vol. 8, 
pp. 24309-24322, 2020. 
[12] R. G. Martinez, A. Lopes, and L. Rodrigues, “Planning workflow 
executions when using spot instances in the cloud," in Proceedings 1of 
the 34th ACM/SIGAPP Symposium on Applied Computing, pp. 310-317, 
2019. 
[13] Q. Guan, Z. Zhang, and S. Fu, “Proactive failure management by 
integrated unsupervised and semi-supervised learning for dependable 
cloud systems," in 2011 Sixth International Conference on Availability, 
Reliability, and Security, pp. 83-90, IEEE, 2011. 
[14] A. Ragmani, A. Elomri, N. Abghour, K. Mous said, M. Rida, and E. 
Badidi, “Adaptive fault-tolerant model for improving cloud computing 
performance using artificial neural network," Procedia Computer 
Science, vol. 170, pp. 929-934, 2020. 
[15] A. K. Mishra, D. K. Yadav, Y. Kumar, and N. Jain, “Improving reliability 
and reducing cost of task execution on preemptible VM instances using 
machine learning approach," The Journal of Supercomputing, vol. 75, no. 
4, pp. 2149-2180, 2019. 
[16] A. Alourani and A. D. Kshemkalyani, “Provisioning spot instances 
without employing fault-tolerance mechanisms," arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2003.13846, 2020. 
[17] T.-P. Pham, S. Ristov, and T. Fahringer, “Performance and behavior 
characterization of amazon ec2 spot instances," in 2018 IEEE 11th 
International Conference on Cloud Computing (CLOUD), pp. 73-81, 
IEEE, 2018. 
[18] W. Chen and E. Deelman, "WorkflowSim: A toolkit for simulating 
scientific workflows in distributed environments," 2012 IEEE 8th 
International Conference on E-Science, Chicago, IL, 2012, pp. 1-8, DOI: 
10.1109/eScience.2012.6404430. 
[19] Deelman, Ewa & Singh, Gurmeet & Su, Mei-Hui & Blythe, James & Gil, 
Yolanda & Kesselman, Carl & Mehta, Gaurang & Vahi, Karan & 
Berriman, G. & Good, John & Laity, Anastasia & Katz, Daniel S.. (2005). 
Pegasus: A Framework for Mapping Complex Scientific Workflows onto 
Distributed 
Systems. 
Scientific 
Programming. 
13. 
219-237. 
10.1155/2005/128026. 
[20] H. R. Faragardi, M. R. Saleh Sedghpour, S. Fazliahmadi, T. Fahringer and 
N. Rasouli, "GRP-HEFT: A Budget-Constrained Resource Provisioning 
Scheme for Workflow Scheduling in IaaS Clouds," in IEEE Transactions 
on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 1239-1254, 1 June 
2020, doi: 10.1109/TPDS.2019.2961098. 
[21] N. Mansouri and G. H.  Dastghaibyfard. “Job scheduling and dynamic 
data 
replication 
in 
data 
grid 
environment”. The 
Journal 
of 
Supercomputing, 2013, 64(1), pp. 204-225. 
 
 
 
