Design, Modeling, and Evaluation of a Scalable
Multi-level Checkpointing System
Adam Moody, Greg Bronevetsky, Kathryn Mohror and Bronis R. de Supinski
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Livermore, CA 94551 USA
{moody20, bronevetsky, kathryn, bronis}@llnl.gov
Abstract—High-performance computing (HPC) systems are
growing more powerful by utilizing more hardware compo-
nents. As the system mean-time-before-failure correspondingly
drops, applications must checkpoint more frequently to make
progress. However, as the system memory sizes grow faster
than the bandwidth to the parallel ﬁle system, the cost of
checkpointing begins to dominate application run times.
Multi-level checkpointing potentially solves this problem
through multiple types of checkpoints with different costs and
different levels of resiliency in a single run. This solution
employs lightweight checkpoints to handle the most common
failure modes and relies on more expensive checkpoints for
less common, but more severe failures. This theoretically
promising approach has not been fully evaluated in a large-
scale, production system context.
We have designed the Scalable Checkpoint/Restart (SCR)
library, a multi-level checkpoint system that writes checkpoints
to RAM, Flash, or disk on the compute nodes in addition to the
parallel ﬁle system. We present the performance and reliability
properties of SCR as well as a probabilistic Markov model
that predicts its performance on current and future systems.
We show that multi-level checkpointing improves efﬁciency on
existing large-scale systems and that this beneﬁt increases as
the system size grows. In particular, we developed low-cost
checkpoint schemes that are 100x-1000x faster than the parallel
ﬁle system and effective against 85% of our system failures.
This leads to a gain in machine efﬁciency of up to 35%, and
it reduces the the load on the parallel ﬁle system by a factor
of two on current and future systems.
I. INTRODUCTION
Although supercomputing systems use high-quality com-
ponents, the systems become less reliable at larger scales
because increased component counts increase overall fault
rates. Applications running on HPC systems can encounter
mean times between failures on the order of hours or days
due to hardware breakdowns [1] and soft errors [2]. For
example, the 100,000 node BlueGene/L system at Lawrence
Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) experiences an L1
cache bit error every 8 hours [3] and a hard failure every
7-10 days. Exascale systems are projected to fail every 3-26
minutes [4], [5].
Commonly, applications tolerate failures by periodically
saving their state to checkpoint ﬁles. They write these check-
points to reliable storage, typically a parallel ﬁle system.
Upon failure, an application can restart from a prior state by
reading in a checkpoint ﬁle.
Checkpointing to a parallel ﬁle system is expensive at
large scale, where a single checkpoint can take on the order
of tens of minutes [6], [7]. Further, computational capabili-
ties of large-scale facilities have increased more quickly than
I/O bandwidths. For example, the rule of thumb for a well-
balanced system is 1 GB/s of I/O bandwidth per 1 TeraFLOP
of computational capability [8], but BlueGene/L at LLNL
and BlueGene/P at Argonne National Laboratory (ANL)
achieve less than a tenth of that rate [6], [7]. Typically, the
limited bandwidth to parallel ﬁle systems is due to system
design choices that optimize for system maintainability and
availability as well as the need to share storage across
multiple machines.
As computing systems increase in scale, increasing failure
rates require more frequent checkpoints, but increased sys-
tem imbalance makes them more expensive. Checkpointing
will become both more critical and less practical. Thus,
PetaFLOP-scale applications will either spend most of their
time writing checkpoints or use alternative fault tolerance
mechanisms such as process-replication approaches that
have overheads of over 100% [9].
Multi-level checkpointing [10], [11] is a promising ap-
proach for addressing this problem, which uses multiple
types of checkpoints that have different levels of resiliency
and cost in a single application run. The slowest but most
resilient level writes to the parallel ﬁle system, which can
withstand a failure of an entire machine. Faster but less
resilient checkpoint levels utilize node-local storage, such
as RAM, Flash or disk, and apply cross-node redundancy
schemes. In our experience, as documented in Section IV,
most failures only disable one or two nodes at a time,
and multi-node failures often disable nodes in a predictable
pattern. Thus, an application can usually recover from a less
resilient checkpoint level, given carefully chosen redundancy
schemes. Multi-level checkpointing allows applications to
take frequent inexpensive checkpoints and less frequent,
more resilient checkpoints, resulting in better efﬁciency and
reduced load on the parallel ﬁle system.
We present the design and implementation of a multi-level
checkpointing system for large-scale systems and demon-
strate its effectiveness through a probabilistic Markov model
and extensive results from a real application. This paper
makes the following major contributions:
U.S. Government work not protected by U.S. copyright. SC10 November 2010, New Orleans, Louisiana, USA.
This work was partially performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under Contract
DE-AC52-07NA27344. (LLNL-CONF-427742).


• the design and implementation of SCR, our multi-level
checkpointing system [12];
• a detailed failure analysis for several large systems;
• a Markov model of multi-level checkpointing;
• an exploration of modeled multi-level checkpointing
performance on today’s and future systems;
• and an empirical evaluation of multi-level checkpoint-
ing with a real application.
Overall, our results demonstrate that multi-level checkpoint-
ing is a critical augmentation to current fault tolerance
methods. We show that SCR can increase system efﬁciency
signiﬁcantly, with gains of as much as 35% while reducing
the load on the parallel ﬁle system by a factor of two on
current and future systems.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents related work. In Section III, we describe and
evaluate SCR. Section IV describes the types of failures we
encounter on several large systems. We detail our model of
multi-level checkpointing in Section V, and in Section VI,
we apply it to explore the use of multi-level checkpointing
in the context of current and future systems. In Section VII,
we apply our model to study the trade-offs associated
with multi-level checkpointing on disk-less systems, and we
conclude with Section VIII.
II. RELATED WORK
Many
models
exist
to
describe
checkpointing
sys-
tems [13], [14], [15], [16]. However, few have mod-
eled multi-level checkpointing systems. Vaidya developed
a Markov model for a two-level checkpoint system that
combines global checkpointing with sender-based message
logging [17]. He used this model to predict average check-
pointing overhead and concluded that multi-level check-
pointing is beneﬁcial under some conditions. We extend
Vaidya’s model to account for an arbitrary number of levels,
each with its own checkpoint cost, recovery cost, and failure
rate. Our model also allows for sequential failures within a
given computation interval.
Panda and Das extended Vaidya’s two-level model to
predict the probability of task completion assuming that
the system has a ﬁxed number of spare resources and no
repair [18]. In our model, we assume the system has an
inﬁnite pool of spare resources. This assumption is valid so
long as a job does not use all system resources, and so long
as the rate of failure does not outpace the rate of repair.
Gelenbe presented a Markov model for multi-level check-
pointing in a transactional computing system [10]. He used
the Markov model steady state equations to derive a formula
that predicts system efﬁciency. However, his formulation did
not easily support an analytical solution to ﬁnd the optimum
efﬁciency. Without an analytical solution, one must explore
the parameter space numerically. Under our formulation, we
derive expressions for efﬁciency using a recursive method
for which dynamic programming reduces the time required
to explore the parameter space.
Several researchers have worked to lower the overheads
of writing checkpoints. Oliner et al. present cooperative
checkpointing, which reduces overheads by only writing
checkpoints that are predicted to be useful, e.g., when
a failure in the near future is likely [19]. Plank et al.
eliminate the overhead of writing checkpoints to disk with
diskless checkpointing [20]. They keep checkpoint data in
memory using mirroring and parity methods for redun-
dancy. Chen et al. present an experimental evaluation of an
implementation of diskless checkpointing targeted towards
ﬂoating point applications on high performance computing
systems [21]. Nowoczynski et al. lower the overheads of
writing checkpoints by increasing the write bandwidth of the
ﬁle system [22]. Plank and Li write compressed checkpoints
asynchronously to lower overheads [23]. Incremental check-
pointing reduces the number of full checkpoints taken by
periodically saving changes in the application data between
full checkpoints [24], [25], [26]. These approaches are
orthogonal to multi-level checkpointing and can be used in
combination with our work.
Researchers have combined two checkpointing methods
in an effort to lower overheads while maintaining resiliency.
Silva and Silva combined disk checkpointing with mirror
and parity checkpointing [27]. They concluded that using
two levels of checkpoints was advantageous. Plank and Li
combine incremental and parity checkpointing in a diskless
checkpointing approach [28].
To the best of our knowledge, we provide the ﬁrst
implementation and evaluation of multi-level checkpointing
on large-scale, production systems. We also provide real
failure data from three production systems that indicate that
multi-level checkpointing on these systems has potential.
Finally, our new performance model enables one to analyze
and optimize a multi-level checkpointing system to improve
utilization of current and future systems.
III. THE SCALABLE CHECKPOINT/RESTART (SCR)
LIBRARY
A. SCR Description
The Scalable Checkpoint/Restart (SCR) library enables
MPI applications to use storage distributed on a system’s
compute nodes to attain high checkpoint and restart I/O
bandwidth. LLNL has used our multi-level checkpoint
system since late 2007 with RAM disk on Linux/x86-
64/Inﬁniband clusters. Production runs currently also use
solid-state drives (SSDs) on the same cluster architecture.
SCR is available under a BSD license [12].
We derive SCR’s approach from two key observations.
First, a job only needs its most recent checkpoint. As soon


as it writes the next checkpoint, we can discard the previous
checkpoint. Second, a typical failure disables a small portion
of the system, but it otherwise leaves most of the system
intact. As we discuss in Section IV, 85% of failures disable
at most one compute node on the clusters on which we
currently use SCR.
Our SCR design leverages these two properties by caching
checkpoint ﬁles in storage local to the compute nodes instead
of the parallel ﬁle system. SCR caches only the most recent
checkpoints, discarding an older checkpoint with each newly
saved checkpoint. SCR can also apply a redundancy scheme
to the cache, so it can recover checkpoints after a failure
disables a small portion of the system. SCR periodically
copies (ﬂushes) a cached checkpoint to the parallel ﬁle
system in order to withstand failures that disable larger
portions of the system. However, a well-chosen redundancy
scheme allows checkpoints to be ﬂushed infrequently.
SCR relies on an external service (e.g., the resource
manager or MPI library) to cancel a job that experiences
a failure. It also requires the resource manager to allow
subsequent jobs to be run within the allocation despite the
failure. After a failure, SCR attempts to recover the most
recent checkpoint from cache. Assuming it does, SCR can
either copy the checkpoint to the parallel ﬁle system and stop
the job, or it can restart the job directly from the cached
checkpoint. In this paper, we focus on the latter option,
which assumes a job’s resource allocation has sufﬁcient
nodes to continue. If SCR fails to recover a checkpoint
from cache, it restarts the job after it fetches the most recent
checkpoint from the parallel ﬁle system.
When requesting an allocation from the resource manager,
jobs can request extra nodes to serve as spares in case any
nodes fail. In practice, we ﬁnd that failures occur infre-
quently enough that one or two spare nodes per thousand
active nodes is sufﬁcient to cover a job duration between 12
and 24 hours. Longer runs provide sufﬁcient time to repair
nodes and return them to the allocation. Thus, we assume
an inﬁnite pool of spare nodes.
SCR is designed for globally-coordinated checkpoints that
are written primarily as a ﬁle per MPI process. Before an
application initiates a new checkpoint, it queries the library
to determine the directory path it should use to write each
checkpoint ﬁle. At the end of the checkpoint, the application
notiﬁes the library that it has completed writing its ﬁles, and
then SCR applies a redundancy scheme to those ﬁles.
The path that SCR speciﬁes and the redundancy scheme
that SCR applies can be different with each checkpoint.
The path could point to any node-local storage device
available on a compute node. For example, it could specify a
directory on a RAM disk, a magnetic hard-drive, or an SSD
depending on what is available. Additionally, SCR supports
three redundancy schemes: LOCAL, PARTNER, and XOR.
100
1000
10000
GB/s
LocalRAMdisk
PartnerRAMdisk
XORRAMdisk
LocalSSD
XORSSD
PartnerSSD
Lustre(10GB/speak)
0.1
1
10
4
8
16
32
64
128
256
512
992
G
N d
Nodes
Fig. 1.
Aggregate write bandwidth to RAM disk, SSD, and Lustre
With LOCAL, SCR writes each ﬁle to storage local to the
node; it does not store redundancy data. With PARTNER, it
writes each ﬁle to local storage and to storage on another
partner node. SCR can recover a copy of the ﬁle, provided
a node and its partner do not simultaneously fail. With XOR,
SCR writes each ﬁle to local storage and small sets of
nodes collectively compute and store parity redundancy data,
similar to RAID-5 [29], [30]. This scheme withstands node
failures so long as two or more nodes from the same set do
not fail at the same time.
B. SCR Performance
To illustrate the performance of SCR, we ran a benchmark
to measure the checkpointing bandwidth on the Coastal
cluster at LLNL. Coastal consists of 1,152 nodes of which
1,104 are compute nodes. Each compute node has two quad-
core 2.4GHz Intel Xeon E5530 processors, 24GB of main
memory, and a 32GB Intel X-25E SSD. DDR Inﬁniband
connects the nodes.
Our benchmark calls the SCR library and writes one ﬁle
per process per checkpoint. It takes several checkpoints,
computes the average cost, and reports the aggregate band-
width. We measured LOCAL, PARTNER, and XOR using
both RAM disk and SSDs. We ran the benchmark with 8
MPI ranks per node and scaled up to 992 nodes. We ran a
similar bandwidth test using the parallel ﬁle system, which
is a Lustre system designed to deliver a peak bandwidth of
10GB/s. Figure 1 shows the results.
SCR is clearly scalable, with its mechanisms all following
a linear trend. Lustre also scales linearly up to 64 nodes,
at which point it levels off near its peak performance of
10GB/s. We observe three general groupings of SCR curves.
Including the parallel ﬁle system as a fourth, SCR provides
up to four checkpoint cost levels on Coastal.


TABLE I
PF3D CHECKPOINT PERFORMANCE
Cluster
Nodes
Data
PFS time
PFS BW
Cache type
Cache time
Cache BW
Speedup
Hera
256
2.07 TB
300 s
7.1 GB/s
XOR RAM disk
15.4 s
138 GB/s
19x
Atlas
512
2.06 TB
439 s
4.8 GB/s
XOR RAM disk
9.1 s
233 GB/s
48x
Coastal
1024
2.14 TB
1051 s
2.1 GB/s
XOR RAM disk
4.5 s
483 GB/s
234x
Coastal
1024
10.27 TB
2500 s
4.2 GB/s
XOR SSD
180.0 s
60 GB/s
14x
The SCR node-local mechanisms substantially outperform
the parallel ﬁle system as more nodes are used. SCR’s
slowest node-local mechanisms use the SSDs, which reach
100GB/s at 992 nodes. This is still 10 times faster than
the parallel ﬁle system. When using PARTNER or XOR
with RAM disk, SCR reaches 1,000GB/s, which is 100
times faster. And ﬁnally, LOCAL with RAM disk achieves
10,000GB/s – 1,000 times faster than Lustre.
PARTNER performs as well as or better than XOR when
using RAM disk, however, it is slower with SSDs. When
using SSDs, the bottleneck is the SSD write speed. In this
case, XOR is faster because it writes one full copy plus
a small fraction of each ﬁle, whereas PARTNER writes
two full copies of each ﬁle. When using RAM disk, the
bottleneck is the speed of the network connection. In this
case, PARTNER and XOR are similar, because they both
require the same amount of data to be transferred between
nodes. XOR with RAM disk scales linearly until 256 nodes,
where network contention reduces its performance by a
constant rate. PARTNER uses a different communication
pattern that avoids this contention. We leave extensions that
consider network topology when assigning nodes to XOR
sets in order to avoid contention as future work
The general performance trends observed with our bench-
mark also extend to production applications that use SCR.
One particular application, the pF3D laser-plasma inter-
action code [31], has used SCR since late 2007 on the
Hera, Atlas and Coastal systems at LLNL. Hera and Atlas
are architecturally similar to Coastal, except that they have
somewhat different node conﬁgurations and lack SSDs. Ta-
ble I shows the checkpoint costs and bandwidths achieved by
pF3D during four different large-scale runs each conﬁgured
to use two checkpoint levels: one type of node-local cache
and the parallel ﬁle system. Note that the cached checkpoints
increase pF3D checkpoint bandwidths by factors ranging
from 14 to 234 when compared to the parallel ﬁle system.
IV. SYSTEM RELIABILITY
We analyzed the job logs of 871 runs of pF3D that
aggregate to over 5 million node-hours on three different
clusters to obtain its failure rates on these platforms. Table II
categorizes each failure according to the checkpoint level
that was required for recovery. A LOCAL checkpoint could
handle 31% of the observed failures, while PARTNER or
XOR could handle another 54%. We had to restart using a
checkpoint from the parallel ﬁle system for only 15% of the
observed failures.
The most common type of failure (54%) consisted of node
failures tripped by a bad power supply, a failed network
interface card, or an unexplained reboot. Each of these
failures disabled a single node, except on Coastal, where
two nodes share a single power supply. Based on the system
architecture, we can conﬁgure SCR to avoid assigning two
nodes that share a common power supply as partners or
members of the same XOR set. Thus, PARTNER and XOR
are sufﬁcient to recover from these failures.
Failed writes to the parallel ﬁle system were also common
(34%). We classify a write failure as temporary (22%) if the
write succeeded in a subsequent job that was restarted within
the same resource allocation. Otherwise, we label the failure
as persistent (12%). A LOCAL checkpoint is sufﬁcient to
restart a job after a temporary write failure. Persistent write
failures consumed the rest of a job’s resource allocation and
forced a restart from Lustre in another allocation.
We also observed ten hung job (5%), in which the job
stopped progressing but did not fail. At LLNL, we use an
in-house tool, io-watchdog, to detect and to cancel hung
jobs so that a subsequent job can run. We can restart a hung
job from a LOCAL checkpoint after it has been canceled. We
also found that seven jobs failed (4%) due to a ﬂoating-point
exception or a memory segmentation violation as the result
of a transient processor fault. We can also use a LOCAL
checkpoint to recover from these faults.
A ﬁnal set of infrequent hardware failures (3%) required
restarting from the parallel ﬁle system. In two such failures,
multiple nodes were disabled when a power breaker on
the wall switched off. We could conﬁgure PARTNER or
XOR to account for a failed power breaker. However, this
event occurs so infrequently that we just rely on the parallel
ﬁle system to recover from it. Three failures were due
to persistently bad hardware such as a bad processor or
memory DIMM that caused jobs to hang repeatedly until
their resource allocation expired.
Of the failures that require a restart from the parallel
ﬁle system, persistent write failures are especially expen-
sive. Although the job often has a valid checkpoint cached
on the cluster, the persistent write failure prevents SCR
from ﬂushing this checkpoint. System design should reduce


TABLE II
PF3D FAILURES ON THREE DIFFERENT CLUSTERS
Clusters
Coastal
Hera
Atlas
Total
Time span
Oct 09 - Mar 10
Nov 08 - Nov 09
May 08 - Oct 09
Number of jobs
135
455
281
871
Node hours
2,830,803
1,428,547
1,370,583
5,629,933
Total failures
24
87
80
191
LOCAL required
2 (08%)
36 (41%)
21 (26%)
59 (31%)
PARTNER/XOR required
18 (75%)
32 (37%)
54 (68%)
104 (54%)
Lustre required
4 (17%)
19 (22%)
5 (06%)
28 (15%)
persistent write failures by either improving the parallel
ﬁle system reliability or by providing backup parallel ﬁle
systems. If we allow for temporary write failures but exclude
persistent write failures, only 6 of 169 failures (3.6%) would
have required a restart from the parallel ﬁle system. Thus,
we could have restarted 96.4% of the failed jobs from
checkpoints cached on the cluster. Nonetheless, we could
restart 85% of the failed jobs from cached checkpoints even
with the current rate of persistent write failures.
V. MULTI-LEVEL CHECKPOINT MODEL
A multi-level checkpointing system can store the same
checkpoint data using several mechanisms, each of which
may have a different cost and level of resilience. Each of
L checkpointing mechanisms is a level, for which level
1 checkpoints are the least expensive and resilient, while
level L checkpoints are the most expensive and resilient. In
our model, we assume that a checkpoint at level k can be
used to recover from a superset of the failure modes that
are recoverable using checkpoints at levels less than k. A
level k failure is severe enough that we must recover from
a checkpoint at level k or higher. A level k recovery is the
process of restoring an application using a checkpoint saved
at level k. A multi-level checkpointing system alternates
between different types of checkpoints to minimize the
overall application running time. Since more severe failures
happen less frequently, the system records one or more level
k checkpoints for every level k + 1 checkpoint.
Several factors determine the performance of a multi-level
checkpointing system: the length of the compute interval be-
tween checkpoints, the checkpoint and recovery costs at each
level, and the failure rates. One must minimize checkpoint
frequency at each level to reduce overhead. At the same
time, one must consider the expected failure frequency of
each level, which determines the lost compute time in the
event of a failure. The interactions of these factors requires
an explicit multi-level checkpoint model to determine the
optimal number of levels and checkpoint frequencies.
We provide a novel probabilistic model of multi-level
checkpointing that can predict the behavior of SCR given
the factors that can affect its performance. This model can
guide general use of multi-level checkpoint systems for
current and future systems and motivate system designs that
provide adequate overall reliability and efﬁciency. We can
use the model to optimize performance of a multi-level
checkpointing implementation on a speciﬁc HPC system.
For a given implementation and system, we measure the
performance and failure probability of each checkpoint level,
as we did for SCR and LLNL clusters in Sections III
and IV. We use this data as model input, along with the
compute interval length, the set of checkpoint levels and
the checkpoint frequency for each level. The model then
predicts the overhead of a particular conﬁguration, account-
ing for delays due to checkpoints, failures, and restarts.
By parameterizing the model with different input values,
we can identify the conﬁguration that provides the optimal
performance on the system. Due to space constraints, we
provide a brief overview of the model derivation, while our
technical report contains the model’s complete details [32].
A. Assumptions and Error
Our model captures multi-level checkpointing systems
with some simplifying assumptions. We discuss these as-
sumptions and their relatively small potential impact.
We assume that failures are independent. Thus, a failure
within a job does not increase the probability of another
failure within that job or future jobs. Although some failures
are correlated in reality, SCR mitigates their effects. For
example, it can avoid using failed nodes in a job allocation
as those nodes are more likely to fail again. It also considers
shared components in the system architecture when conﬁg-
uring its redundancy schemes. For example, it does not use
processes on the same node as partners.
We assume that checkpoints are taken at regular intervals
throughout the job. Although the checkpoint interval may
vary, the application that we study, pF3D, does checkpoint
at regular intervals. We also assume costs to read and to
write checkpoints are constant throughout the job. Actual
read and write times vary, particularly if they involve shared
resources such as the network or parallel ﬁle system, which
does introduce some error into our predictions.
When a failure occurs, we assume the application rolls
back to the most recent checkpoint capable of recover-


ing from the failure. We do not model possible savings
from using an older, lower level checkpoint that is also
sufﬁcient for recovery. Such a checkpoint requires more
recomputation, but its faster recovery time may lead to better
overall efﬁciency. Thus, we may underestimate the potential
performance of multi-level checkpointing.
We assume an inﬁnite pool of spare nodes, as discussed
in Section III. SCR users often request extra nodes in their
job allocation. In general, the failure rate is less than the
repair rate, so this assumption typically holds. If no spare
nodes remain, SCR copies the most recent checkpoint to
the parallel ﬁle system and terminates the job. We do not
model this capability, which improves efﬁciency relative to
using the older checkpoint stored on the parallel ﬁles system.
Similarly, SCR handles batch allocation limits by copying
the most recent checkpoint to the parallel ﬁle system before
the allocation expires, which we do not model. Instead, we
assume a single level L checkpoint period completes within
the allocation time limit. Both assumptions lead the model
to overestimate performance if SCR must copy checkpoints
to the parallel ﬁle system despite the actual advantage that
this design choice provides.
B. Model Description
We model a multi-level checkpointing system as a Markov
Model (MM). An MM is a directed graph in which nodes
represent application states and edges represent the tran-
sitions between states. We annotate each edge with the
probability that the application will transition from the
source state to the destination state. MMs are history-
less: they assume transition probabilities only depend on
the current state. We also annotate transitions with cost
information such as the time spent in the source state given
that the transition is taken. Our model has computation
and recovery states. Computation states represent periods of
application computation followed by a checkpoint. Recovery
states represent the process of restoring an application from
a checkpoint saved previously.
Figure 2(a) presents the basic structure of our model. The
white states in the top row are computation states, and the
single blue state at the bottom is a recovery state. Each
computation state is labeled by the checkpoint level that
terminates it, while the recovery state is labeled by the
checkpoint level it uses to restore the application.
If no failures occur, the application transitions from one
computation state to the next (horizontal transitions between
computation states). If a failure occurs, the application
transitions to the recovery state corresponding to the most
recent checkpoint capable of recovering from the failure
(downward transitions from computation states). For exam-
ple, if a failure at level k or less occurs while in the middle
computation state in Figure 2(a), the system transitions to


N
N
/HYHOdN
)DLOXUHV
'XULQJ
&RPSXWDWLRQRU
&KHFNSRLQWLQJ
6XFFHVVIXO
&RPSXWDWLRQ
6XFFHVVIXO
&RPSXWDWLRQ
/HYHO N
)DLOXUHV
'XULQJ
5HFRYHU\
6XFFHVVIXO
/HYHON
5HFRYHU\
/HYHOtN
)DLOXUHV
'XULQJ
5HFRYHU\
/HYHO!N
)DLOXUHV
'XULQJ
&RPSXWDWLRQRU
&KHFNSRLQWLQJ
(a) Basic structure of multi-level Markov model














/HYHO3HULRG
/HYHO3HULRG
/HYHO3HULRG
/HYHO3HULRG
(b) No failures
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
3
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
3
...
2
1
1
1
1
3
1
1
(c) Level 1 failures and recoveries
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
3
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
3
...
2
1
1
1
1
3
1
1
1
(d) Level 2 failures and recoveries
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
3
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
3
1
...
2
1
1
1
1
3
1
1
(e) Level 3 failures and recoveries
Fig. 2.
Structure and example of the multi-Level Markov model
recovery state k, which restores the application using the
checkpoint written at the end of the previous computation
state. However, if a failure occurs at a level greater than k,
the system must transition to a recovery state corresponding
to an older checkpoint saved at a higher level.
If no failures occur during recovery, the application tran-
sitions to the computation state that follows the checkpoint
used for recovery (upward transition from recovery state). If
a failure occurs while in a level k recovery, and if that failure
is at a level less than k, we assume the current recovery state
must be restarted (loop transition back to recovery state).
However, if the failure is at level k or greater, we assume
the application must transition to a higher-level recovery
state (downward transition from recovery state). We assume
a recovery state at level L, the highest level, can be restarted
to recover from a failure at any level.


(a) General hierarchical structure
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
3
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
Y(3,3)
Y(2,2)
Z(2,3)
Y(1,1)
Z(1,2)
X(2,2)
Y(2,2)
X(1,1)
X(1,1)
X(1,2)
Y(1,1)
Y(1,1)
Y(1,2)
X(1,1)
X(1,1)
X(1,2)
Z(1,2)
Y(1,1)
Y(1,1)
Y(1,1)
Y(1,2)
2
1
1
1
1
3
1
1
X(2,3)
Y(2,3)
X(1,1)
X(1,1)
X(1,3)
Z(1,3)
Y(1,1)
Y(1,1)
Y(1,3)
Y(1,1)
X(3,3)
3
1 . . .
(b) Example hierarchical structure
Fig. 3.
Hierarchical structure of Markov model
Figures 2(b)–(e) show a full MM for an example three
level checkpointing scheme. Figure 2(b) shows the portion
that corresponds to failure-free execution, containing only
computation states. Checkpoints are taken hierarchically,
with three level 1 checkpoints during each level 2 period
and two level 2 checkpoints during each level 3 period.
Figure 2(c) shows the portion that models the effect of
level 1 failures, while Figures 2(d)–(e) show the transitions
corresponding to level 2 and level 3 failures respectively.
As Figure 3(a) illustrates, we can recursively build a full
model by composing three basic blocks, which we label
X(k, c), Y (k, c), and Z(k, c). The parameter c denotes the
checkpoint level taken by the last computation state in a
block, while the parameter k denotes the block’s level. An
X(k, c) block consists of a Y (k, c) block and a recovery
state at level k. A Z(k, c) block consists of a series of
X(k, k) blocks and a terminating X(k, c) block. A Y (k, c)
block consists of one Y (k −1, c) block or a Y (k −1, k −1)
block followed by a Z(k −1, c) block or (when k = 1)
a base computation state that terminates with a checkpoint
at level c. Figure 3(b) shows how we compose these blocks
for the example from Figure 2. This recursive structure leads
to recurrence equations, which we can solve efﬁciently for
the expected run time. We compute expected times and
probabilities for transitions from the k = 1 the blocks from
given expected times and transition probabilities from the
base computation and recovery states. We then compute the
times and probabilities for the blocks at k = 2, and so on.
VI. MODEL EXPLORATION
We use our model to explore the behavior of SCR under
varying conditions. We show the beneﬁts of multi-level
TABLE III
EXPECTED AND OBSERVED EFFICIENCY
System
Expected
Observed
Duration of
Efﬁciency
Efﬁciency
Observation
Coastal
95.2%
94.68%
716,613 node-hours
Atlas
96.7%
92.39%
553,829 node-hours
checkpointing over single-level checkpointing as failure rates
and parallel ﬁle system characteristics change. Also, we
illustrate how to use the model to select parameter values that
maximize system utilization. We evaluate a particular check-
pointing conﬁguration by inspecting its efﬁciency, deﬁned
as the minimum run time required to complete a portion of
work divided by the expected run time to complete that same
portion accounting for checkpoint and recovery overheads as
predicted by the model.
First, we compare the model’s predictions of pf3D efﬁ-
ciency to that observed in real runs on Coastal and Atlas
in Table III. The data show that the model’s predictions are
within a few percent of observed reality for this application
on real systems. Albeit limited due to the many hours
required to gather data, these results provide some assurance
that our model is accurate.
We now use the model to explore multi-level checkpoint-
ing in a more general context. In the following experiments,
we simulated a three level checkpointing system (L = 3)
and varied the length of the compute interval, the number
of level 1 and level 2 checkpoints per level 3 period, the
failure rates, and the cost of level 3 checkpoints.
For checkpoint costs, we use the times recorded in Table I
for checkpointing pF3D on Coastal using LOCAL on RAM,
XOR on RAM, and Lustre, which gives us costs of 0.5
seconds, 4.5 seconds, and 1052 seconds, respectively. We set
recovery costs to be the same as checkpoint costs. Using the
failure data for pF3D on Coastal in Table II, we express the
failure rates in units of failures per job-second, i.e., average
number of failures at a given level per node-hour, multiplied
by the number of nodes used in the job, divided by 3,600
seconds per hour. This leads to failure rates of 2 · 10−7 for
level 1, 1.8 · 10−6 for level 2, and 4 · 10−7 for level 3.
As future systems become larger, failure rates are expected
to increase, and as the system memory size grows faster
than the performance of the parallel ﬁle system, the cost
of accessing the parallel ﬁle system is expected to increase.
To explore these effects, we increase the base failure rates
and the level L checkpoint costs by factors of 2, 10, and
50. We do not adjust the costs of lower-level checkpoints,
since the performance of node-local storage is expected to
scale with system size. For each combination, we identiﬁed
the compute interval and the level 1 and level 2 checkpoint
counts that provide the highest efﬁciency. For comparison,
we performed the same experiment for single-level check-
pointing, assuming only the parallel ﬁle system is available.


Fig. 4.
Optimal efﬁciency for single- and multi-level checkpointing
Figure 4 presents the efﬁciency achieved for each conﬁg-
uration. We label the results for the multi-level system as
“Multi” and those for the single-level system as “Single.”
The groupings of bars along the x-axis correspond to failure
rates that are one, two, ten, or ﬁfty times the base values.
Within each grouping, we increase the cost of the level L
checkpoint by one, two, ten, and ﬁfty times the base value.
The multi-level system always results in higher efﬁcien-
cies. Although not shown, it also increases the time between
checkpoints to the parallel ﬁle system. Both advantages
increase with increasing failure rates or higher parallel ﬁle
system costs. The gain in machine efﬁciency ranges from
a few percent up to 35%, and the load on the parallel ﬁle
system is reduced by a factor from 2x-4x. Thus, compared
to single-level checkpointing, multi-level checkpointing si-
multaneously increases efﬁciency while reducing load on the
parallel ﬁle system. These results highlight the beneﬁts of
multi-level checkpointing on current and future systems.
Overall, we ﬁnd that future systems require multi-level
checkpointing. If we maintain relative parallel ﬁle system
performance, a three level checkpointing system achieves
efﬁciencies over 75% even with 50× less reliable systems.
However, we cannot tolerate higher failure rates if the
cost to access the parallel ﬁle system increases. If systems
become 50× less reliable and the cost of saving application
state to the parallel ﬁle system rises by 10×, a three level
checkpointing system only achieves 26% efﬁciency.
Figure 5 provides insight into multi-level checkpointing
by showing the compute intervals and level 2 checkpoint
counts that provide the optimal efﬁciency for each failure
rate and level L checkpoint cost combination. We do not
graph the optimal level 1 checkpoint counts, which are
always zero due to the relatively low number of failures
from which we can recover using level 1 checkpoints.
The optimal compute interval decreases with either in-
creasing failure rate or increasing level L checkpoint cost.
For the level 2 checkpoint counts, the optimal counts in-
(a) Optimal compute interval
(b) Optimal level 2 checkpoint counts
Fig. 5.
Optimal multi-level checkpointing parameter values
crease dramatically with increasing failure rate. The trend for
increasing level L checkpoint cost is less clear, with higher
optimal values for costs that are twice or 50× greater than
for the costs that were one and 10× higher. These results
indicate that applications running on systems with higher
failure rates or higher parallel ﬁle system overheads must
increase the ratio of lower-level checkpoints to parallel ﬁle
system checkpoints to maximize efﬁciency.
We investigated the relationship between our model pa-
rameters and the expected efﬁciency of the multi-level
model. Figure 6 shows the expected efﬁciency when failure
rates and the level L checkpoint cost are 1×, 2×, and 10×
their base values. The plots were produced by setting the
level 1 count to zero, setting the level 2 count to ﬁve, and
varying the compute interval from 0 to 2 · 105 seconds.
In general, efﬁciencies ﬁrst increase sharply with increas-
ing compute intervals and then decrease relatively slowly
after reaching the optimum. The optimal efﬁciencies are
lower and the declines in efﬁciency past the peak are sharper
for higher parallel ﬁle system costs and failure rates. Further,


95%
100%
90%
95%
80%
85%
75%
80%
iciency
C=1x F=1x
70%
Effi
C=1xF=1x
C=1xF=2x
C=1xF=10x
C 2 F 1
60%
65%
C=2xF=1x
C=2xF=2x
C=2xF=10x
55%
C=10xF=1x
C=10xF=2x
C=10xF=10x
50%
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
Ch
k
i
I
l (
d )
CheckpointInterval(seconds)
Fig. 6.
Efﬁciency versus compute interval
the compute interval has a complex relationship with failure
rates and checkpoint costs. The efﬁciencies produced by
short compute intervals are highly sensitive to checkpoint
cost and insensitive to failure rates. However, this effect is
reversed for large compute intervals, where efﬁciencies are
sensitive to failure rates but insensitive to checkpoint costs.
Overall, we observe a broad range of compute intervals
that result in near-optimal efﬁciencies for level 1 and level
2 checkpoint counts that are below or near optimal values.
The effect of increasing level 1 counts is lower efﬁciencies
and narrower near-optimal ranges. The effect of increasing
level 2 counts is relatively higher efﬁciencies and wider near-
optimal ranges up to a point beyond the optimal level 2
count, after which the beneﬁts of adding level 2 checkpoints
declines. These results show that we must carefully choose
parameters when using multi-level checkpointing as failure
rates and parallel ﬁle system costs increase. However, we
can utilize our model to guide these decisions.
VII. SCR ON DISKLESS SYSTEMS
Clusters often use diskless compute nodes. However,
Linux supports a RAM disk, which is a ﬁle system main-
tained in main memory. We can conﬁgure SCR to use RAM
disk as its node-local storage, but we then need sufﬁcient
memory to store at least one checkpoint in memory along
with the application working set. Simulations that require
all available memory on diskless clusters cannot use SCR.
However, often sufﬁcient memory can be made available
by running the same simulation on more compute nodes to
spread the working set among more processes. We then must
determine if it is worthwhile to use more compute resources
in order to use SCR. Our multi-level checkpoint model can
guide this choice by predicting an expected savings in node
hours required to complete the job.
For example, consider the pF3D runs from Table I.
Assume the original problem requires N1 nodes and using
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
onscalabilty
Ͳ0.2
Ͳ0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2.0
Applicatio
Increase in number of nodes (N / N )
HeraC=1xF=1x
CoastalC=1xF=1x
AtlasC=1xF=1x
Increaseinnumberofnodes(N2 /N1)
Fig. 7.
Required scalability to beneﬁt by allocating more nodes
SCR requires N2 > N1 nodes. We must ﬁrst adjust the
failure rates and checkpoint costs in order to compute the
expected efﬁciency with additional nodes.
The mean-time-before-failure for the application de-
creases when it uses more nodes since it is exposed to more
hardware. The amount of hardware used scales linearly with
the number of nodes. Since we assume multiple failures
within a class are independent, we scale the failure rate of
each failure class linearly with the number of nodes.
Also, the total size of the data set remains ﬁxed regardless
of the number of nodes. Thus, we assume the cost to
checkpoint to the parallel ﬁle system remains constant.
However, the amount of data stored per node decreases
linearly with the number of nodes since we spread the data
evenly among the nodes. Thus, the cost to checkpoint to
RAM disk decreases linearly with the number of nodes.
With these adjustments, we apply the model to compute
the conditions under which using SCR by allocating more
nodes decreases total node hours. We express the results by
plotting the required application scalability as a function of
the ratio of the number of nodes, N2/N1. If an application
meets or exceeds the required scalability at a particular
N2/N1 ratio, then it will beneﬁt by allocating N2/N1 more
nodes to use SCR. We deﬁne application scalability in the
standard way, computed as the difference in speedup divided
by the difference in the number of nodes. Using the pF3D
checkpoint costs from the top three rows in Table I and the
failure rates from Table II, we show the required application
scalability for Hera, Atlas, and Coastal in Figure 7.
The three clusters have three distinct curves. Coastal is
the most reliable system, but its parallel ﬁle system is the
slowest. Atlas and Hera have much higher failure rates than
Coastal, but they have faster parallel ﬁle systems. Atlas and
Hera have similar failure rates but the parallel ﬁle system
on Hera is faster than on Atlas. These varying properties
produce three different curves. Thus, the same application
may beneﬁt from requesting additional nodes on one system


0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
onscalability
Ͳ0.2
Ͳ0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
1.0
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
2.0
Applicatio
Increase in number of nodes (N / N )
AtlasC=1xF=1x
AtlasC=2xF=1x
AtlasC=1xF=10x
AtlasC=2xF=10x
Increaseinnumberofnodes(N2 /N1)
Fig. 8.
Required scalability for higher overhead and failure rates
but not another. Generally, more applications will beneﬁt
from using more nodes on Atlas than on Coastal, and more
on Coastal than on Hera.
We observe ranges for which allocating more nodes is
beneﬁcial for all values of N2/N1 plotted. Applications can
beneﬁt even if we must double the number of nodes to use
SCR. However, at this limit, the application must scale very
well, requiring a scalability factor between 0.90 and 0.97
depending on the platform. We require less scalability when
SCR needs fewer nodes. For example, on Atlas, if only
20% more nodes are required, the application only needs
a scalability factor of at least 0.65 to beneﬁt. Finally, the
application can beneﬁt even with zero or negative scalability
if it needs less than 10% additional nodes. Thus, the appli-
cation may compute more slowly when using more nodes
but still complete the problem in fewer node hours due to
the increased efﬁciency provided by SCR.
In order to understand the potential impact of larger future
systems, Figure 8 plots the required scalability for Atlas if
we increase the parallel ﬁle system cost and the failure rate.
More applications beneﬁt by allocating more nodes to use
SCR when either the cost to checkpoint to the parallel ﬁle
system or the failure rate increases. If the checkpoint cost
doubles and the failure rate increases by a factor of ten, an
application with zero scalability could allocate up to 40%
more nodes and still complete in fewer node hours. While
not shown, the machine efﬁciency at this extreme drops to
as low as 62% without SCR, but it stays above 85% with
SCR. For all cases, SCR reduces the checkpoint frequency
to the parallel ﬁle system by 2x-4x.
VIII. CONCLUSIONS
We presented a novel multi-level checkpointing im-
plementation, the Scalable Checkpoint/Restart (SCR) li-
brary. SCR combines checkpointing to stable storage with
lower-overhead, less-resilient checkpoint types, e.g., copying
checkpoints to memory on other nodes. SCR performance far
exceeds that of the parallel ﬁle system, as much as 1, 000×
faster when using LOCAL checkpoints.
We also presented a detailed failure analysis for several
large HPC systems. We found that applications could restart
from a large majority of system failures using low-overhead
checkpoints cached on the cluster. Only 15% of the observed
failures required applications to restart from the parallel ﬁle
system. Further, improving the reliability of the parallel ﬁle
system would enable applications to recover from up to
96.4% of all failures using checkpoints cached on the cluster.
Finally, we presented a novel, hierarchical Markov model
that predicts the performance of multi-level checkpointing
systems based on system reliability and checkpoint cost. This
model can guide users in selecting the best checkpointing
parameters for their application. Our analysis with this model
demonstrates that multi-level checkpointing signiﬁcantly im-
proves system efﬁciency, particularly as failure rates and
relative parallel ﬁle system checkpoint costs increase. We
ﬁnd that we can still achieve 85% efﬁciency even if systems
become 50× less reliable. Our model also demonstrates that
many applications will complete in fewer processor hours
by using more nodes in order to provide sufﬁcient memory
to use SCR. Finally, SCR achieves these gains in efﬁciency
while simultaneously reducing the load on the parallel ﬁle
system by more than a factor of two.
For future work, we will extend our model to account for
additional features of SCR. For example, we do not currently
model SCR’s ability to drain lower level checkpoints to the
parallel ﬁle system. We will extend our model to determine
how this feature can help reduce writes to the parallel ﬁle
system. We will also extend SCR to copy checkpoints to the
parallel ﬁle system asynchronously.
REFERENCES
[1] B. Schroeder and G. A. Gibson, “A Large-Scale Study of Failures
in High-Performance Computing Systems,” in In Proceedings of
the International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks
(DSN), June 2006, pp. 249–258.
[2] S. E. Michalak, K. W. Harris, N. W. Hengartner, B. E. Takala,
and S. A. Wender, “Predicting the Number of Fatal Soft Errors in
Los Alamos National Laboratory’s ASC Q Supercomputer,” IEEE
Transactions on Device and Materials Reliability, vol. 5, no. 3, pp.
329–335, September 2005.
[3] J. N. Glosli, K. J. Caspersen, J. A. Gunnels, D. F. Richards, R. E.
Rudd, and F. H. Streitz, “Extending Stability Beyond CPU Millen-
nium: A Micron-Scale Atomistic Simulation of Kelvin-Helmholtz
Instability,” in Proceedings of the 2007 ACM/IEEE Conference on
Supercomputing (SC), 2007, pp. 1–11.
[4] B. Schroeder and G. Gibson, “Understanding Failure in Petascale
Computers,” Journal of Physics Conference Series: SciDAC, vol. 78,
p. 012022, June 2007.
[5] E. Vivek Sarkar, Ed., ExaScale Software Study: Software Challenges
in Exascale Systems, 2009.
[6] K. Iskra, J. W. Romein, K. Yoshii, and P. Beckman, “ZOID: I/O-
Forwarding Infrastructure for Petascale Architectures,” in PPoPP ’08:
Proceedings of the 13th ACM SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and
Practice of Parallel Programming, 2008, pp. 153–162.


[7] R. Ross, J. Moreira, K. Cupps, and W. Pfeiffer, “Parallel I/O on
the IBM Blue Gene/L System,” Blue Gene/L Consortium Quarterly
Newsletter, Tech. Rep., First Quarter, 2006.
[8] R. Hedges, B. Loewe, T. McLarty, and C. Morrone, “Parallel File
System Testing for the Lunatic Fringe: The Care and Feeding of
Restless I/O Power Users,” in Proceedings of the 22nd IEEE / 13th
NASA Goddard Conference on Mass Storage Systems and Technolo-
gies (MSST), 2005, pp. 3–17.
[9] R. E. Lyons and W. Vanderkulk, “The Use of Triple-Modular Redun-
dancy to Improve Computer Reliability,” IBM Journal of Research
and Development, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 200–209, 1962.
[10] E. Gelenbe, “A Model of Roll-back Recovery with Multiple Check-
points,” in Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on
Software Engineering (ICSE ’76), 1976, pp. 251–255.
[11] N. H. Vaidya, “A Case for Multi-Level Distributed Recovery
Schemes,” Texas A&M University, Tech. Rep. 94-043, May 1994.
[12] “Scalable Checkpoint/Restart Library.” [Online]. Available: http:
//sourceforge.net/projects/scalablecr/
[13] J. W. Young, “A First Order Approximation to the Optimum Check-
point Interval,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 17, no. 9, pp. 530–
531, 1974.
[14] A. Duda, “The Effects of Checkpointing on Program Execution Time,”
Information Processing Letters, vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 221–229, 1983.
[15] J. S. Plank and M. G. Thomason, “Processor Allocation and Check-
point Interval Selection in Cluster Computing Systems,” Journal of
Parallel Distributed Computing, vol. 61, no. 11, pp. 1570–1590, 2001.
[16] J.
Daly,
“A
Higher
Order
Estimate
of
the
Optimum
Checkpoint
Interval
for
Restart
Dumps,”
Future
Generation
Computer
Systems,
vol.
22,
no.
3,
pp.
303
–
312,
2006.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
B6V06-4F490KH-6/2/6ebfa65591e5d0eb09e2ae5ae3b2ed44
[17] N. H. Vaidya, “A Case for Two-Level Distributed Recovery Schemes,”
in Proceedings of the 1995 ACM SIGMETRICS Joint International
Conference on Measurement and Modeling of Computer Systems
(SIGMETRICS ’95), 1995, pp. 64–73.
[18] B. S. Panda and S. K. Das, “Performance Evaluation of a Two Level
Error Recovery Scheme for Distributed Systems,” in 4th International
Workshop on Distributed Computing, Mobile and Wireless Computing
(IWDC), 2002, pp. 88–97.
[19] A. J. Oliner, L. Rudolph, and R. K. Sahoo, “Cooperative Check-
pointing: A Robust Approach to Large-Scale Systems Reliability,”
in ICS ’06: Proceedings of the 20th Annual International Conference
on Supercomputing, 2006, pp. 14–23.
[20] J. S. Plank, K. Li, and M. A. Puening, “Diskless Checkpointing,” IEEE
Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, vol. 9, no. 10, pp.
972–986, October 1998.
[21] Z. Chen, G. E. Fagg, E. Gabriel, J. Langou, T. Angskun, G. Bosilca,
and J. Dongarra, “Fault Tolerant High Performance Computing by
a Coding Approach,” in PPoPP ’05: Proceedings of the Tenth ACM
SIGPLAN Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Pro-
gramming, 2005, pp. 213–223.
[22] P. Nowoczynski, N. Stone, J. Yanovich, and J. Sommerﬁeld, “Zest
Checkpoint Storage System for Large Supercomputers,” in 3rd Petas-
cale Data Storage Workshop (PDSW), Nov. 2008.
[23] J. S. Plank and K. Li, “ickp: A Consistent Checkpointer for Multi-
computers,” IEEE Parallel & Distributed Technology, vol. 2, no. 2,
pp. 62–67, 1994.
[24] S. Agarwal, R. Garg, M. S. Gupta, and J. E. Moreira, “Adaptive Incre-
mental Checkpointing for Massively Parallel Systems,” in Proceedings
of the 18th Annual International Conference on Supercomputing
(ICS), 2004, pp. 277–286.
[25] S. I. Feldman and C. B. Brown, “IGOR: A System for Program
Debugging via Reversible Execution,” in Proceedings of the 1988
ACM SIGPLAN and SIGOPS Workshop on Parallel and Distributed
Debugging (PADD), 1988, pp. 112–123.
[26] N. Naksinehaboon, Y. Liu, C. B. Leangsuksun, R. Nassar, M. Paun,
and S. L. Scott, “Reliability-Aware Approach: An Incremental Check-
point/Restart Model in HPC Environments,” in Proceedings of the
2008 Eighth IEEE International Symposium on Cluster Computing
and the Grid (CCGRID), 2008, pp. 783–788.
[27] L. Silva and J. Silva, “Using Two-Level Stable Storage for Efﬁcient
Checkpointing,” IEE Proceedings - Software, vol. 145, no. 6, pp. 198–
202, Dec 1998.
[28] J. S. Plank and K. Li, “Faster Checkpointing with N+1 Parity,” in
Twenty-Fourth International Symposium on Fault-Tolerant Computing
(FTCS), Digest of Papers, Jun 1994, pp. 288 –297.
[29] D. Patterson, G. Gibson, and R. Katz, “A Case for Redundant Arrays
of Inexpensive Disks (RAID),” in Proceedings of the 1988 ACM
SIGMOD Conference on Management of Data, 1988.
[30] W. Gropp, R. Ross, and N. Miller, “Providing Efﬁcient I/O Redun-
dancy in MPI Environments,” in Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
3241:7786, September 2004. 11th European PVM/MPI Users Group
Meeting, 2004.
[31] R. L. Berger, C. H. Still, E. A. Williams, and A. B. Langdon, “On
the Dominant and Subdominant Behavior of Stimulated Raman and
Brillouin Scattering Driven by Nonuniform Laser Beams,” Physics of
Plasmas, vol. 5, p. 4337, 1998.
[32] A. Moody, G. Bronevetsky, K. Mohror, and B. de Supinski, “Detailed
Modeling,
Design,
and
Evaluation
of
a
Scalable
Multi-level
Checkpointing System,” Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory,
Tech.
Rep.
LLNL-TR-440491,
July
2010.
[Online].
Available:
https://library-ext.llnl.gov
