Benchmarking the scalability of MPI-based parallel 
solvers for fluid dynamics in low-budget cloud infrastructure 
Vanderlei M. Pereira Filho', Marcio Castro' 
1Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina (UFSC) 
Centro Tecnolégico — Departamento de Informatica e Estatistica (INE) 
R. Delfino Conti, s/n - Trindade, Florianépolis — SC, 88040-900 — Brazil 
vanderlei.filho@posgrad.ufsc.br, marcio.castro@posgrad.ufsc.br 
Abstract. This ongoing study presents an analysis of the scaling of MPI-enabled 
partial differential equations (PDE) systems solver implementations with public 
cloud infrastructure. Shallow-Water equations are used as case study for analy- 
sis. Results indicate that public cloud can be a cost-effective solution 
for highly 
coupled problems, given a certain problem size threshold and appropriate in- 
frastructure configuration. However, adequate software tooling and models are 
required for estimating and dimensioning optimal clusters. 
1. Introduction 
Public cloud infrastructure is an affordable and easily available alternative for scientists 
and small organizations, allowing the execution of HPC workloads without relying on 
expensive on-premise specialized hardware. Nevertheless this approach incurs in sev- 
eral challenges, such as unreliable and slow networks, “noisy” tenants, and a relatively 
cumbersome configuration process [Netto et al. 2018]. This study aims to evaluate the vi- 
ability of budget-constrained cloud environments for highly coupled parallel tasks using 
fluid dynamics simulation as case study. 
Shallow-Water equations describe a thin layer of a fluid of constant density in hy- 
drostatic balance, and are derived from the Navier-Stokes equations. To solve these sys- 
tems numerically, most methods are based on computing the solution in discrete places 
inside a meshed geometry, which can then be divided and distributed for parallel process- 
ing. However, to compute the solution at mesh cells in the domains borders, information 
not locally available is needed, making this a not embarrassingly parallelizable problem. 
2. Experiments and Results 
We evaluated the distributed Shallow-Water model provided by the Oceananigans' Julia 
package (v0.60.0). Realistic models include detailed information describing the ocean 
shape and floor topography, however we confine our experiments to a 47km? square 
region with a flat floor and reflective borders. We also consider two problem-sizes in 
terms of resolution: problem A with 128 cells and problem B with 1024? cells. The 
experiments are set to simulate 100 seconds of shallow-water physics with a time-step 
of 0.001s, totalizing 100000 iterations. The MPI topology applied is cartesian and load- 
balancing follows a one-dimensional slab decomposition strategy. 
Cloud environments were built with Amazon Web Services EC2? instances at 
availability zone us-east-1. Instance types used in this study are described in detail at 
Table 1.


Table 1. Tested Amazon Web Services EC2 Instance Types. 
Instance 
Number 
Sustained 
RAM 
 Network 
Hypervisor On-Demand 
Type 
 of vCPUs Clock Speed Memory Performance 
Pricing 
13.2xlarge 
8 
25GHz ~ 32GB 
 UptoSGbps 
 Nitro 
 0.3328 USD/h 
c4.2xlarge 
8 
29GHz ~ 15GB 
 Upto1Gbps 
 Xen 
0398 USD/ 
cSn.2xlarge 
8 
34GHz ~ 21GB  Upto25Gbps 
 Nitro 
 0432USD/A 
Performance results for 
Performance results for 
Problem B (larger 10232 grid) 
blem A (smaler 1282 grid) 
arge 
= 2darge 
w0 
Experiment cost (Uso) 
Figure 1. Experimental results (left-side: Problem A; right-side: Problem B). 
The poor scaling for problem A shows that there is a lower bound on problem 
size to justify the use of multiple nodes. The reason is due to the network bandwidth 
bottleneck, which is at most 25Gbits for c5n.2x1arge machines and much worse for 
cheaper nodes. c5n.2xlarge is 23% more expensive than t 3.2x1large, but results 
show that using it is actually slightly cheaper because of less compute time (see results 
for Problem B executed with 4-node clusters). A problem-size threshold for efficient use 
of cluster resources is difficult to model given the amount of variables involved. Nev- 
ertheless, it is possible to find a rough cost rate estimate empirically before committing 
infrastructure for a complete solution, by executing the same simulation with a limited 
number of iterations for example and extrapolating results to the total expected number 
of iterations. Knowing execution time beforehand is of critical importance for optimizing 
cluster configurations, and thus cloud HPC cost-effectiveness. 
The addition of fault tolerance characteristics into the distributed solvers may 
also allow the exploration of considerably cheaper spot machines, which are transient 
resources that can be revoked by the cloud provider at any time. Spot instances are usu- 
ally between 30% to 70% cheaper than the on-demand instances used in this study. We 
are currently studying two approaches for fault-tolerant MPI applications, the first based 
on process-level checkpoint restart with external libraries, and a second more intrusive 
approach based on User-Level Failure Mitigation (ULFM), the latest effort of the MPI 
Forum?® for standardizing error handling in the MPI standard. 
References 
Netto, M. A. S., Calheiros, R. N., Rodrigues, E. R., Cunha, R. L. F,, and Buyya, R. (2018). 
HPC Cloud for Scientific and Business Applications: Taxonomy, Vision, and Research 
Challenges. volume 51. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA. 
"https://github.com/CliMA/Oceananigans.jl 
2https://aws.amazon.com/pt/ec2/ 
3https://www.mpi-forum.org/
