Design Considerations for Building and Running
Containerized MPI Applications
Joshua Hursey
IBM
Rochester, MN, USA
jhursey@us.ibm.com
Abstract—Packaging parallel applications in containers has
become increasingly popular on High Performance Computing
(HPC) systems. These applications depend on the Message Pass-
ing Interface (MPI) for communication between processes in their
parallel jobs. This paper explores the design considerations that
container maintainers must weigh when building and running
their applications on HPC systems. This includes highlighting and
resolving the cgroup, namespace, and security boundaries used
by some container runtimes that may hinder an MPI library
from performing efﬁciently. This paper explores the impact
on MPI libraries of two opposing container launch models,
and various models for incorporating a system optimized MPI
library including a novel hybrid BYO-MPI with system mounted
components technique. This paper analyses the critical problem
of cross-version compatibility between libraries interacting across
the container boundary as the container image and the HPC
system evolve over time. The paper concludes by translating the
lessons learned from running MPI applications in traditional
HPC systems to running in container orchestration environments
like Kubernetes. The discussion around each of these topics will
provide a foundation for container maintainers to make informed
choices that best suit their speciﬁc MPI application and HPC
system requirements.
Index Terms—High Performance Computing, Container, MPI,
PMIx, Linux, Kubernetes
I. INTRODUCTION
Containers have become an increasingly popular choice for
building, distributing, and running Message Passing Interface
(MPI) applications on High Performance Computing (HPC)
systems. The MPI standard [1] is relied upon by many HPC
applications to efﬁciently exchange data between processes in
the system. There are many MPI implementations available as
user-space libraries with customizations for speciﬁc systems
that tease out the maximum performance from the compu-
tational hardware, network, and storage components of HPC
systems.
Designers of containers for MPI applications must consider
a number of build and runtime design questions including:
• Should the application be launched using the HPC system
native launch mechanism or with the launcher provided
by the MPI implementation inside the container image?
• Should all process run in the same container instance on
a node, or each in individual instances?
• Should the application use the MPI library inside the
container or should it use the HPC system provided
version?
• How close should the library versions inside my container
match those on the host system?
• What namespaces and capabilities does MPI care the
most about when passing messages both on-node and
between nodes?
The goal of this paper is to explore each of these questions
in the context of MPI to provide a foundation for a container
designer to make informed choices for their speciﬁc applica-
tion and HPC system requirements. Since these requirements
vary from site to site, this paper attempts not to recommend
one solution or technique over another. Instead this paper
focuses on highlighting the design space. Though the focus of
this paper is on MPI much of the discussion can be applied to
any concurrent programming library such as OpenSHMEM [2]
and PGAS [3] libraries.
In a Linux environment a process running in a container is
directly accessing the host OS, and any devices and system
resources made available to it at the time of creation. What
distinguishes a containerized process from a non-containerized
process is the presence of various ﬁle system mounts, names-
paces, control groups (cgroups), capabilities, and security
proﬁles that change its view of the system and what operations
it is allowed to perform. A custom ﬁle system mount is often
the primary way that users think about containers since it
allows them to bringing their own OS personality, libraries,
compilation tools, and runtime environment for their applica-
tion. Packaging all of these application dependencies into the
container image can increase portability and reusability of the
container image.
Linux namespaces restrict the process’ view of the overall
system including its view of other processes on the system
providing a degree of isolation between sets of processes on
the system. Linux cgroups restrict or limit the process’ access
to system resources such as CPUs, GPUs, memory, and IO
bandwidth. Cgroups can be used to ensure that a process does
not exceed a resource envelope while running on a node with
other processes. Finally, capabilities and seccomp security
proﬁles restrict the actions available to a container including
available system calls [4].
Each container runtime has a different set of defaults for
each of these containment dimensions, and options to adjust
them before launching the container. The purpose of this paper
is to highlight the impact of these containment dimensions on
MPI libraries to provide the reader with a foundation when
35
2020 2nd International Workshop on Containers and New Orchestration Paradigms for Isolated Environments in HPC
(CANOPIE-HPC)
DOI 10.1109/CANOPIEHPC51917.2020.00010
/20/$31 00 ©2020 IEEE
.
 
 
978-1-6654-1555-2
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 29,2021 at 23:49:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


considering how they approach containerization in various
HPC systems.
In Section II we discuss design decisions related to building
the container image. Section III highlights challenges with
launching and wiring up MPI processes including a discussion
of two opposing launch mapping options. Sections IV and
V explore the intranode and internode container boundary
issues, respectfully, that may hinder MPI efﬁciency on an HPC
system. Section VI presents three models for incorporating a
system optimized MPI library into the container image. Sec-
tion VII discusses cross-version issues that commonly occur as
container images and HPC system software levels drift apart.
Section VIII takes the lessons learned from traditional HPC
systems and applies them to container orchestrated environ-
ments. Finally, in Section IX, we conclude our discussion and
present some opportunities for future investigation.
II. BUILDING AN MPI CONTAINER IMAGE
The HPC application container will include the application
and all of its dependencies such as the MPI library, accelerator
libraries and tools, and parallel math libraries. The MPI library
will need the container to include at least the user-space
libraries for the network(s), accelerator(s), and parallel ﬁle
system(s) for the targeted HPC system. If the container needs
to target multiple systems then you may need to have either
multiple sets of these libraries or multiple versions of your
container image – one per HPC target system. The dependent
user-space libraries are necessary to install (or build from
source) an MPI implementation for the HPC system.
Choosing the right MPI implementation for your container
is about picking one that you are most comfortable with using,
and one that is most compatible with the target system(s).
Section VI explores the topic of using your own MPI versus
the system MPI at runtime. This section focuses on including
the necessary dependencies in the container image at build
time.
It is important to highlight that the container image can
only contain the user-space portion of the libraries that MPI
depends upon. Some network and accelerator libraries, such
as InﬁniBand and CUDA, also have a Linux kernel-space
modules that exist outside of the container that must be
compatible with the user-space libraries inside the container.
It is important to review the forward and backward (referred
to in this paper as cross-version) compatibility requirements
of these libraries when constructing the container image. See
Section VII for further discussion of cross-version compatibil-
ity.
Additionally, some parallel ﬁle systems, like IBM Spectrum
Scale, have user-space libraries that MPI can use to optimize
MPI-IO operations for that ﬁle system. The container image
should incorporate compatible versions of these libraries to
more efﬁciently harness this resource.
Matching these user-space versus kernel-space and inter-
dependent library versions is a complex task requiring much
more knowledge of the inter-library dependencies and minor
version differences than can be expected of most HPC users. In
response to this need container builder projects and container
runtimes are working to incorporate logic to hide much of
this complexity from the end user. Container builder projects
like HPC Container Maker (HPCCM) [5] and Spack [6] can
trace the dependencies of the MPI library (and other HPC
libraries) to include one or more versions compatible with
the targeted HPC system(s). Container runtimes, such as the
NVIDIA Container Runtime [7] and Sarus [8], provide a hook
interface (often Open Container Initiative (OCI) compatible)
that can be used inject and/or activate the correct version
of these libraries at runtime before the application starts
execution. If an incompatible library version pairing inside
versus outside of the container is detected then an error
can be raised with appropriate information on how the user
can correct the situation. Some container runtimes use this
technique, such as Sarus and Shifter [9], to inject a whole
MPI implementation from the host system with some caveats
discussed in Section VI.
It is also important to remember that the container image is
an architecture speciﬁc binary object meaning that a different
image is needed for an x86 machine versus a ppc64le
machine, for example. Additionally, even when in the same
broader processor architecture family (e.g., ppc64le) the
compiler used to build the application may introduce archi-
tecture speciﬁc optimizations for speciﬁc CPUs (e.g., Power8
versus Power9) on which you built the container image. Often
it is important to build the container on the same CPU
architecture as the target HPC system.
When building a container to support an MPI application
on HPC systems users have a choice between building a
speciﬁc container to a speciﬁc HPC system or building a
generic container for a broader set of HPC systems. Building
a container for a speciﬁc HPC system allows the application
extract the maximum performance on that system since the
library levels and optimizations will match most closely with
those on the system. However, a new container image will
need to be created for each system. Container builder projects
and remote builders can help users manage this complexity.
Alternatively, a user could try to build a container image
as generically as possible targeting the broadest set of HPC
system requirements that they intend to run against. By doing
so a user might consider reducing the system speciﬁc depen-
dencies on, for example, kernel-space interconnect libraries
and instead use a more generic version of the interconnect
library or Ethernet. This may come at a performance loss on
any given HPC system, but produces a more portable container
image between machines and possibly more longevity on a
single machine. Some of the potential performance loss could
be mitigated by container runtimes and OCI hooks that “ﬁxup”
the container with system speciﬁc libraries at runtime.
III. LAUNCH AND WIRE-UP OF MPI PROCESSES
An MPI application is composed of many individual pro-
cesses distributed across an allocated set of hardware re-
sources. The Resource Manager (RM) plays a critical role
in the lifecycle of an MPI job. The RM assists the MPI
36
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 29,2021 at 23:49:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


library in launching MPI processes, enabling those processes
to discover static and dynamic information about other pro-
cesses in the job, facilitating the establishment of communica-
tion channels between processes, notiﬁcation of events (such
as wall-time), and support for dynamic job operations like
MPI_Comm_spawn. The RM could be the one provided by an
MPI library (such as ORTE [10], PRRTE [11], or Hydra [12])
or provided by the HPC system like SchedMD’s Slurm, Cray’s
Application Level Placement Scheduler (ALPS), or IBM’s Job
Step Manager (JSM).
There are two sets of interrelated design considerations
presented in this section. The ﬁrst has to do with how
containers are launched in the system, and the second on
how the MPI library communicates with the RM across the
container boundary.
A. Launching MPI Processes
MPI processes are launched by either the system provided
launcher (e.g., srun, aprun, jsrun) or a launcher provided
by an MPI implementation (e.g., mpirun, mpiexec). These
are sometimes referred to as a direct launch and an indirect
launch, respectively.
The ﬁrst decision that you need to make is if you are using
the direct or indirect launch method for your containerized ap-
plication. The direct launch method often uses pre-established
daemons on the system to speed up launch times. The indirect
launch method requires the launching of daemons on the nodes
then the launching of the application across those nodes.
The advantage of the direct launch method is that, when
provided, this method usually tightly integrates with other
system services providing the most custom launch experience
for that speciﬁc system. The disadvantage is that the RM will
often exist outside of your container and will need a previ-
ously deﬁned mechanism to communicate across the container
boundary, such as with a Process Management Interface -
Exascale (PMIx) library. Often direct launch methods force
you into a “one container per process” (1-per-proc) launch
mapping described in Section III-A1 because the RM is not
able to distinguish between launching a traditional application
binary and a containerized binary. Not all HPC systems
have a direct launch method, and some Workload Managers
(WLMs) provide options for transparently providing a “one
container per node” (1-per-node) launch mapping described
in Section III-A2.
The advantage of the indirect launch method is that it often
allows a users to choose between a 1-per-proc and a 1-per-
node launch mapping depending on the needs of the container.
If you are using the indirect launch method inside of your
container then you can standardize on that launcher allowing
you to choose the runtime that you are most comfortable with
and with which you have veriﬁed your application. This results
in simpler job execution scripts since you only need to target
one launch mechanism, and the speciﬁc process placement and
binding options for that mechanism. The biggest disadvantage
is that the launch mechanism might not be supported on the
target HPC system or be as tightly integrated as the direct
launch method. If you are using the launcher from inside of
your container then you will also need to make sure that the
remote daemons are also launched inside of the same container
image. Often this will force you into a 1-per-node launch
mapping described in Section III-A2.
Along with the decision of direct vs indirect launching the
user must consider if they are using a 1-per-proc or a 1-per-
node launch mapping. This decision impacts how MPI process
see each other on a node (explored in Section IV), how they
see the node itself (explored in Section V), and the resource
requirements a runtime might consume to maintain multiple
containers on a node.
1) Launching one container per process (1-per-proc):
In the 1-per-proc launch mapping (sometimes called “rank
contained”) the RM will launch one container per process
on all nodes. See Figure 1 for an illustration of this launch
mapping. To the RM the 1-per-proc launch mapping looks
just like launching one un-contained, traditional binary since
the container and the process are logically the same. The job
script, external to the container, will call the native launch
mechanism (be it direct or indirect) to start the MPI processes
in the job.
The 1-per-proc mapping allows a job script to mix multiple
containers in the same job allocation which can be helpful
in workﬂow scenarios. Historically, this mapping was used
because it did not require any RM or WLM integration making
it great for older HPC systems. Modern HPC RMs and WLMs
are now integrating container management features that can,
for example, help stage container images to compute nodes
before the job starts.
The disadvantage of this model is that each MPI process on
a single node has a container boundary around it that might
limit its view of other MPI processes in this job negatively
impacting the performance of the MPI library. The impact of
such a boundary on MPI is explored in Section IV. Container
runtimes often allow you to remove most or nearly all of these
barriers.
2) Launching one container per node (1-per-node): In the
1-per-node launch mapping (sometimes called “fully con-
tained”) the RM will launch one container per node with all
of the processes assigned to that node launched inside the
same container instance. See Figure 2 for an illustration of this
launch mapping. The RM needs to know about the container
boundary so that it can start up the container instance and
launch one or more processes inside that same instance. Often
the RM will place a daemon inside the container instance
that will then create the MPI processes. This requires that
the daemon program and all of its dependencies are available
inside of the container – either as part of the container image
or mounted in separately.
The advantage of the 1-per-node mapping is that there are
no boundaries between MPI processes in the same job since
they share the same container instance. The container can be
as isolated from the other processes on the system as necessary
without adversely impacting the processes inside the container.
This makes it seem to the application like a privately imaged
37
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 29,2021 at 23:49:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


Launch Node
node1
node2
PMIx
RM
MPI
container
MPI 
Process
myjob.sh
mpirun -np 6 …  
c0
R0
orted
c1
R1
c2
R2
c0
R3
orted
c1
R4
c2
R5
Fig. 1. Illustration of one container per process (1-per-proc) launch mapping.
Launch Node
node1
node2
PMIx
RM
MPI
container
MPI 
Process
c0
myjob.sh
mpirun -np 6 …  
c0
R0
orted
R1
R2
c0
R3
orted
R4
R5
Fig. 2. Illustration of one container per node (1-per-node) launch mapping.
virtual machine without the virtual machine overhead. This
model better matches orchestrated environments where the
bare metal operating system is minimal as discussed further
in Section VIII.
The 1-per-node launch mapping better ﬁts the bring-your-
own MPI scenario where the job script and the (indirect)
launcher are built into the container. The job script can be
tuned to the speciﬁc launcher packaged with the container.
The launcher needs to be able to launch itself into a re-
mote container instance when starting up its daemons. Some
WLMs, like LSF, hide this from the launcher behind the
blaunch API [13]. Whereas some indirect launchers, like
ORTE and PRRTE, have options to assist in starting the
container then launching inside of that container instance (e.g.,
the --launch-agent option).
The disadvantage of the 1-per-node mapping is that if you
are using a direct launcher then the RM and WLM needs
to know how to launch inside the container instance, which
is not a common feature. However if you use an indirect
launch mechanism and bring-your-own launcher then the RM
and WLM need not be aware of containerization. Even when
bringing your own launcher that launcher will need to talk
with the RM to acquire, at least, the list of hosts allocated to
the job and some guidance on the preferred way to start its
daemons on those allocated nodes.
The launcher daemon inside the container will be talking
across the container boundary to the RM (and possibly the
WLM) and as such the launcher will either need a portable API
to the RMs or include in the container the necessary libraries
to communicate with the RM. The PMIx library has been
used to talk across the container boundary between the indirect
launch daemon and the RM daemon – though more work on
reﬁning this use case is needed. Often the RM leaves enough
information in the environment of the launch node to discover
this information without the need for a separate library (e.g.,
using environment variables and temporary ﬁles). The launcher
just needs to know where to ﬁnd this information and how to
parse it. However, some RMs do require access to APIs for
this type of discovery so the container must either be built
with the library included, or have it mounted in at runtime.
The latter has the advantage of picking up the exact same
version of the library on both sides of the container boundary
side stepping the need for cross-version compatibility issues
as one side or the other drifts.
B. Wire-up of MPI Processes
After the MPI processes are launched they need the RM
to assist them in discovering their peer processes and wiring
up communication between them. Often this occurs in or
shortly after MPI_Init. Some HPC systems have a custom,
non-standardized interface between the MPI library and the
RM. However, many HPC software ecosystems have been
moving towards PMIx [14] as a community deﬁned, standard
API for a programming library like MPI or OpenSHMEM to
interact with the RM in as abstract of a manner as possible.
For containerized applications the primary advantage of PMIx
versus a system speciﬁc library is that they need to only
package one library in their container to interact with a wide
range of RMs instead of one for each system on which they
might run.
The MPI library will use PMIx to query the RM for the
job allocation information, information regarding peers in the
job, and exchange connectivity information between sets of
peers. This data exchange is often referred to as a business
card exchange or module exchange (modex) operation.
PMIx was designed to connect RM (like Slurm and JSM)
with tools (like debuggers) and clients (like MPI libraries)
possibly across container boundaries. The OpenPMIx imple-
mentation [15] provides cross-version compatibility assurances
for container environments where the version of PMIx inside
38
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 29,2021 at 23:49:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


the container may be older or newer than that used by
other PMIx enabled components (like the RM) in the system
possibly outside of the container instance.
Figure 1 illustrates a 1-per-proc launch mapping in which
we can see Open MPI (with the ORTE runtime) launching six
containers on two compute nodes. The yellow boxes represent
the container instances. The PMIx communication, represented
as red arrows, is crossing the container boundary between the
MPI processes inside the container and the orted daemon
outside of the container. It is across this communication
boundary that we need to worry about similar cross-version
compatibility as we discussed earlier for accelerator, network
system libraries.
Figure 2 illustrates a 1-per-node launch mapping in which
the indirect launcher (mpirun in this example) coordinates
with the host RM to determine how best to navigate the
system. PMIx can be used here for mpirun to launch its
orted daemons by operating ﬁrst as a PMIx tool then as a
PMIx server.
IV. MPI INTRANODE COMMUNICATION
Efﬁcient MPI implementations leverage shared memory for
intranode communication. If all of the MPI processes are
in the same container instance within a node (a 1-per-node
launch mapping) then there are no namespace or cgroup
boundaries between them that would impede their ability to
use shared memory. There is still a boundary between the
processes inside the container and the Linux OS which is
expressed through capabilities and seccomp security proﬁles.
Alternatively, if each process is in a separate container instance
within a node (a 1-per-proc launch mapping) then we need to
make sure those containers on the same node have sufﬁcient
ability to “see” and “interact” with each other across those
container boundaries. In this scenario we need to consider
Linux namespaces (in addition to capabilities and security
proﬁles) which can limit the view of one process from another
process in different containers on the same system hindering
the establishment of shared memory segments.
For capabilities and seccomp security proﬁles it is helpful
to remember that MPI processes running bare metal have
access to the Linux system call interface and a default set
of capabilities that are often sufﬁcient for MPI’s needs. When
moving into a container instance we are often only further
constraining these restrictions. The security principle of least
privilege tell us to give the container only the access that it
needs and as such a container runtime may impose a security
proﬁle that is overly restrictive.
For shared memory support MPI will need access to the
system calls to setup a shared memory segment (e.g., shmat,
shmget), often a ﬁle system mount point visible to all
processes (e.g., in /tmp or /dev/shm), and sufﬁcient ca-
pabilities to read/write to the peer processes memory. The
latter item is important when using Cross Memory Attach
(CMA) [16] and system calls like process_vm_readv
and process_vm_writev which are used to perform a
single-copy message transfer to/from the address space of one
MPI process from/to that of the calling MPI process. In this
case the CAP_SYS_PTRACE capability is required for CMA
to function between processes even in the same container
instance. MPI implementations may have other shared memory
single-copy techniques that they can fall back on if this
capability is not present, possibly at a performance loss.
Namespace considerations often only become an issue in
the 1-per-proc launch mapping where there are container
boundaries between processes on the same system. To see
and interact with other MPI processes on the same system
the container instances need to share the same PID and IPC
namespaces. Note that they do not need the full system view
of these namespaces, but a namespace that is shared between
the container instances so that the MPI processes can see
each other. This allows for the fundamental shared memory
operations to proceed across that container boundary.
Next, the MPI library may need part of the host local ﬁle
system shared between the container instances if the MPI
library is, for example, using the ﬁle system to back the shared
memory segment or provide rendezvous information. In a 1-
per-node mapping that ﬁle system mount could be isolated to
just that container instance. In a 1-per-proc mapping it must
be accessible at the same path in all container instances.
Next, each container instance on the same node should see
the same hostname since some MPI implementations use this
information to help determine locally in the system. This is
deﬁned by the UTS namespace in Linux. The PMIx interface
can be leveraged in this instance to minimize the sensitivity
of the MPI library to the hostname, but often the application
and user are still sensitive to the consistency of the hostname.
When a container instance is started by the container
runtime it is often created in a cgroup to restrict the resources
available to processes in this container instance. For NVIDIA
GPUs, for example, the cgroup must contain the GPUs to
be available to this process and any uniﬁed memory regions
associated with those GPUs. In a 1-per-node mapping this is
sufﬁcient to use GPU-to-GPU copy techniques like GPUDirect
Peer-to-Peer. In a 1-per-proc mapping the sum of all of the
GPUs and uniﬁed memory regions must be present in all of
the containers to use such copy techniques.
Finally, some libraries that support MPI libraries like
hwloc [17] use the system call interface to get and set
process bindings, memory policies, and memory bindings.
The system call interfaces required for some of these activ-
ities may be restricted by default. As such, for hwloc the
CAP_SYS_NICE capability is required to access system calls
such as set_mempolicy.
V. MPI INTERNODE COMMUNICATION
At runtime MPI libraries need direct access to network
devices, accelerators, and parallel ﬁle systems to drive appli-
cation performance. These are the aspects of the HPC system
that the user came to leverage, so MPI needs unimpeded
access to deliver the performance the user expects. Container
runtimes can expose the raw devices by mounting them into
the container instance. This provides the processes inside
39
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 29,2021 at 23:49:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


the container with direct access to the hardware without any
virtualization overhead.
Some devices, such as Inﬁniband, require particular capa-
bilities be granted to the container that might otherwise be
restricted. Speciﬁcally CAP_IPC_LOCK to lock memory for
data transmission. Associated with this the ulimit setting for
“max locked memory” needs to be set to unlimited.
For HPC systems using a GPU-to-GPU copy technique
across nodes, like GPUDirect RDMA, then you also need to
make sure the network device(s) is in the cgroup(s) associated
with the containers along with the GPUs and any uniﬁed
memory regions.
More fundamentally the Ethernet interface exposed to con-
tainers is often just a local loopback to the node where the
container is running. If you are running in a multi-node
allocation you must either expose the host network (removing
the network isolation imposed by the NET namespace) or
construct an overlay network between the containers. Most
container runtimes have a mechanism to expose the host Eth-
ernet network into the container instance. This is a convenient
option, but does expose the processes in the container to the
entire network. Some RMs, like LSF, use the host network
(NET) and IPC namespaces to allow the containers to more
fully interact with the native network and other processes on
the system.
Alternatively a private overlay network can be created
between the container instances in the same job. There are
many ways to create an overlay network for containers though
most users may turn to container orchestrators like Docker
Swarm or Kubernetes which provide overlay networks in
addition to other services. Section VIII discusses using MPI
in these environments in more detail. The advantage of the
overlay network is that all containers have their own private
network fully routable to each other and when combined with
DNS capabilities provided by some container orchestrators
the container instances start to look and feel like private
nodes. The disadvantage is that the overlay imposes additional
latency between containers as they route through the virtual
and physical networking layers. Beltre, et al. [18] explore this
performance impact in more detail.
VI. USE THE SYSTEM MPI OR BRING YOUR OWN MPI
In prior sections we discussed mounting devices into the
container at runtime. In this section we will focus on how to
insert an MPI library that knows how to leverage these devices
for MPI operations into the container. For this discussion we
will focus on three broad techniques:
A. Bring Your Own MPI (BYO-MPI)
When building an application container an MPI imple-
mentation must be available in the container to compile the
application. This MPI implementation will likely also include
an indirect launcher (e.g., mpirun). The user can then verify
the correctness of their container by using the MPI library and
associated launcher on an available development cluster. The
user can choose to continue using this embedded MPI library
instead of the version provided by the target HPC system –
so called the BYO-MPI technique.
Using the BYO-MPI technique the user can validate their
application against a speciﬁc implementation and build of the
MPI library. They can also tune their job run script to the
provided launcher to get the process layout and binding that
best serves their application. Further, if the application relies
on newer, non-standard, or typically disabled features of the
MPI implementation then the embedded MPI library can be
adjusted to ﬁt the needs of the application without forcing the
target HPC system to provide an alternative installation (which
might not be possible in some situations).
The primary disadvantage of a purely BYO-MPI scenario
is that you might not get the best performance from the
system compared to the system provided MPI. This is often
the result of system architecture and network tuning in the
system provided MPI. If the system provided MPI is open
source then it is likely that you could match its conﬁguration.
However, if the system provided MPI is proprietary then it is
not likely that you will be able to do so.
B. Bind the System MPI (System-MPI)
In the System-MPI technique the system provided MPI
library is bound into the container image at runtime. The
application inside the container will need to be built against
an MPI implementation that is Application Binary Interface
(ABI) compatible with the system MPI. At runtime the system
MPI implementation is mounted into the container image, and
the binary and library search paths are adjusted to pick up this
version of the MPI library instead of the one embedded into
the container.
The advantage with this model is that you are using the
supported MPI library built for that target system. You will
likely get the best performance and integration experience.
However, care must be taken to adjust any rpaths attached
to the application binary or associated parallel libraries inside
the container that might point directly to the embedded version
otherwise a mix of versions can be experienced. Additional
care must be taken when mounting in any shared library
from the host system that the dependencies that it carries
are satisﬁed when inside the container. One such example of
this problem is with conﬂicting versions of glibc where the
system MPI depends upon a newer version of the library than
was in the container [19].
The other challenge with this model is that you need to
make sure the MPI that the container was built against is
ABI compatible with the MPI that you intend to mount in
from the system. There exist versioned pairs of freely available
and/or open source and proprietary MPI implementations that
are ABI compatible, if conﬁgured correctly. The onus is on
the container developer to seek out these MPI implementations
when crafting their container for the target HPC system.
It is important to note that there is no standard ABI
for MPI so each implementation is likely incompatible at
the MPI interface level. The question is often raised about
why the MPI Forum standardization body does not create
40
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 29,2021 at 23:49:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


a standardized MPI ABI to resolve this situation. The MPI
Forum has been working on this since at least 2008 [20]
without much progress. There are good reasons as to why
there are ABI differences in common data structures like
predeﬁned communicators and datatypes that often focus on
design decisions that relate directly to performance.
C. Combine BYO-MPI with System Components
This last option is a blend of the BYO-MPI and System-
MPI options. Some MPI implementations, like Open MPI [10],
and interconnect libraries, like UCX [21], are built around a
modular component design. In this design there are frame-
works deﬁned around sections of MPI functionality such as
collectives or point-to-point operations. Each framework has a
stable APIs behind which one or more runtime selectable com-
ponents are built [22]. These components often take the form
of shared libraries placed in one or more well known search
directories. All of the components in these search directories
are dynamically loaded at runtime and a selection process
speciﬁc to each framework chooses the winning component(s)
for the MPI process. This modular component design allows a
user to drop in additional component shared objects into one
of these well known directories post-install that will be used
at runtime.
As a result of this design a container image can be built with
a version of Open MPI, for example, that supports basic TCP
and shared memory operations. Then, at container runtime,
the target HPC system can provide a set of shared objects
that are tuned to support the system architecture and network
for this speciﬁc system. These shared library objects can be
bind mounted into the container, and the Open MPI library
embedded in the container will incorporate them at runtime
allowing you to take better advantage of that speciﬁc HPC
system.
The advantage is that you are still using the MPI installation
that you validated your application against with any new or
optional features activated that your application requires. Ad-
ditionally, the network drivers and any customized collectives
are dropped into the container to tune it for the speciﬁc system
to deliver improved performance.
The disadvantage is the same as the System-MPI technique
since you still have an ABI consideration, but maybe one
that is more manageable. The only requirement here is that
the ABI at the framework level (not the whole MPI interface
level) is compatible with the component being dropped in to
the container. Since the ABI is at the framework level it is a
smaller interface and is governed by a speciﬁc implementation
then it might be easier to negotiate a stabilized interface over
a range of versions. Knowing that range of versions an OCI
hook could be developed that brings in the shared objects when
they are compatible, or skips them (maybe with an appropriate
warning) when they are not. Since the MPI library is fully
functional without the system provided shared objects the
result of not mounting in the new objects is that the job might
not run as fast as it would otherwise, but it will still run. The
container will still have to worry about carried dependencies
on these shared library objects, but is it likely that the surface
area is reduced and the container runtime hook can help check
for this type of inconsistency.
VII. AGING IN PLACE
An important detail to consider with containers is cross-
version compatibility across the container boundary seen in
Figure 3 as MOFED W.x in user-space interacting with
MOFED Y.x in kernel-space. As soon as your application
inside the container needs to interact with a process or
interface outside of the container then version compatibility
becomes a vital consideration. This goes beyond API or ABI
compatibility since it may often include the wire protocols that
different library versions use internally. This is often seen in
network or accelerator libraries with a user-space and a kernel-
space component. The user-space component of the software
lives inside the container, and the kernel-space component
lives outside of the container. The two library components
might interact though a well deﬁned API or use a custom
protocol. Any mismatch in these levels could lead to program
crashes or data integrity issues.
There are three scenarios to consider here all of which are
commonly expected. First, the version of the library inside the
container matches the version outside of the container. This
could be because the container was built with this system in
mind, or that the library was bind mounted into the container
at runtime. In this scenario we should not expect any problems.
Second, the version of the library inside the container
is newer than the version outside of the container. This is
typically found when a newer application container makes use
of an established HPC system. HPC systems often upgrade
their system software on a slower timeline since doing so
often incurs downtime and extensive stability testing before
rolling out. Applications that wish to take advantage of newer
versions of their application that require newer library versions
will need to make sure they are compatible with the system
side.
Third, the version of the library inside the container is older
than the version outside of the container. This is typically
found when an established container image is ﬁrst used after
an HPC system software upgrade.
The container maintainer needs to have a good idea of
the forwards and backwards compatibility guarantees provided
by system libraries especially those with a user-space and a
kernel-space component.
The issue of cross-version compatibility raises the ques-
tion of whether a container maintainer should rebuild their
container for the target system after every system upgrade, or
should they try to make more general choices that might allow
them to go longer between needing to refresh their container
image? One such solution to ease this burden on the container
maintainers is for the HPC system administrator in conjunction
with the vendor to establish a base container image with the
necessary library versions for each upgrade of the system.
This would allow the container maintainer to change the base
container image that they are pulling from and rebuild from
41
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 29,2021 at 23:49:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


Container Boundary
Centos 8
./a.out
RHEL 7
MOFED Y.x (kernel module)
CUDA A.x (kernel module)
Hardware
GPU0
GPU1
GPU2
GPU3
mlx5_0
mlx5_1
mlx5_2
MOFED W.x (user space)
CUDA B.x (user space)
mlx5_3
Open MPI
Fig. 3. Illustration of cross-version issues across a container boundary.
there. The system administrator then governs which range of
base images are supported for the current conﬁguration of the
HPC system.
VIII. CONTAINER ORCHESTRATION PLATFORMS AND MPI
To this point the discussion has focused on using contain-
ers in traditional HPC systems. These systems have batch
oriented WLMs and RMs with possibly some support for
helping manage containers in the system. As HPC workloads
begin to explore cloud environments those that are already
containerized are experimenting with container orchestration
platforms like Red Hat OpenShift or other Kubernetes (K8s)
ecosystems. To simplify our discussion in this section we will
assume a K8s orchestrator, though the principles apply to any
container orchestration ecosystem.
In K8s, and speciﬁcally Red Hat OpenShift, there is a move
towards a minimalist OS, such as CoreOS [23], running on
each compute resource in the system. This minimal OS is
designed to support only the necessary set of services to run
containers on the system. As such the OS image typically
does not have many user space libraries like MPI installed.
For HPC containers this means that they will not be able to
rely on mounting in libraries from the host OS and instead
must package all of their parallel computing libraries in the
container image. This forces the containers into a BYO-MPI
(Section VI-A) model and makes them dependent on using an
indirect launcher packaged with their container.
K8s allocates resources to pods under which one or more
containers are grouped. The pods are effectively containers
without a running image since they are deﬁned by the cgroups,
namespaces, capabilities, and security proﬁles that serve to
protect containers running in one pod from interacting di-
rectly with containers running in another pod on the same
system. Containers running inside a pod each have their own
running image, but experience a much more permeable and
ﬂexible set of namespace boundaries between those containers.
Though pods can support the 1-per-proc launch mapping
(Section III-A1) it is much more common to use a 1-per-
pod launch mapping (like the 1-per-node mapping discussed
in Section III-A2).
The same requirements for internode and intranode commu-
nication (replacing node with pod) requirements described in
sections IV and V, respectively, apply to a K8s environment.
The difference with a K8s environment is whether these
requirements on namespaces and capabilities are deﬁned in
the pod and container K8s YAML descriptions, or if they are
deﬁned directly in the underlying container runtime behind
the K8s Container Runtime Interface (CRI). In practice we
have found that a mixture of both are necessary. For example,
currently, K8s does not have the means to specify the ulimit
for containers in a pod which is necessary for InﬁniBand
support [24]. To set the ulimit one must adjust the default
set by the container runtime, such as Docker, behind the
CRI otherwise the container may default to an undesirable
value. Whereas K8s does have the ability to specify capa-
bilities per pod which lets us set CAP_SYS_PTRACE and
CAP_IPC_LOCK for improved intra- and inter-node commu-
nication.
The Ethernet network exposed to the containers is usually
in the form of a private overlay network as mentioned in
Section V. The overlay network adds some additional overhead
to Ethernet trafﬁc in exchange for for the beneﬁt of a private
network [18]. Depending on if the K8s environment is running
on bare metal or in a virtual machine accessing the high
speed network might need to be routed through a hypervisor.
For example, InﬁniBand can be exposed through K8s running
on bare metal as native HCA devices or exposed through
K8s running in a virtual machine as SRIOV devices. The
former provides better performance while the latter gives
more provisioning control opportunities to the orchestrator
environment.
Currently, the default scheduler in K8s does not have an
understanding of gang scheduling necessary to start all of
the required pods for an MPI job at the same time. Without
this capability it is possible to deadlock the system as two
job greedily grab resources until either they have what they
need to run or there are none left and neither job can make
progress. Replacing the default scheduler with one that can
handle this type of scheduling and resource provisioning is
critical to running MPI applications [25]–[27]
IX. CONCLUSION
HPC systems are seeing an increase in the use of containers
to run parallel applications many of which rely on MPI
42
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 29,2021 at 23:49:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


libraries. Containers allow the application to be packaged with
exactly the libraries and other system dependencies that it
requires whether they be newer, older, or differently conﬁgured
than that which is provided on the target HPC system. These
containers face a number of sometimes challenging decisions
when choosing how to run their containerized MPI application
on an HPC system.
In this paper we explored many of these build and runtime
challenges. For each we presented some common options
along with a discussion of the advantages and disadvantages
of each. The purpose of this paper was to explore these
challenges as a means to provide container maintainers with
a foundation of information to make informed choices for
their speciﬁc application needs. Where possible we tried not to
prescribe a preference for one approach over another to allow
the container maintainer to weigh the choices for their speciﬁc
requirements.
The challenges explored in this paper included library
compatibility issues that need to be considered when building
a container image. Along with this challenge we explored
cross-version compatibility issues at runtime. When launching
MPI processes, we presented two competing launch mapping
models namely the one container per process and one container
per node models. We discussed the role of PMIx in assisting
MPI libraries in wiring up and negotiating interactions across
container boundaries. We explored how various container
boundaries (e.g., cgroups, namespaces, capabilities) can hinder
an MPI implementations ability to perform efﬁciently on an
HPC system. We presented three models for how to insert a
tuned version of the MPI library into the container. Finally
we ﬁnished with a discussion of translating the experience
with containers in traditional HPC environments to a container
orchestration environment, speciﬁcally K8s.
In the future, we plan to expand our exploration to the
parallel ﬁle system requirements needed by MPI-IO opera-
tions including a discussion of the role of object storage in
orchestrated environments on MPI-IO. Additionally, we plan
to explore containerized applications that are starting to use
MPI Sessions [28] and dynamic operations which will likely
stress the MPI library and RM coordination through PMIx.
REFERENCES
[1] Message Passing Interface Forum, “MPI-3.1: Ofﬁcial document,”
http://www.mpi-forum.org/docs, June 2015.
[2] OpenSHMEM Consortium, “OpenSHMEM speciﬁcation 1.4 ﬁnal,”
http://openshmem.org/site/Speciﬁcation, 2016, [Online; accessed 26-
Apr-2017].
[3] PGAS
working
group,
“Partitioned
global
address
space,”
http://www.pgas.org/, 2016, [Online; accessed 04-Apr-2019].
[4] A.
Grattaﬁori,
“Understanding
and
hardening
Linux
contain-
ers,”
NCC
Group,
Tech.
Rep.
1.1,
June
2016.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.nccgroup.com/us/our-research/understanding-
and-hardening-linux-containers/
[5] S. McMillan, “Making containers easier with HPC container maker,” in
In HPCSYSPROS18: HPC System Professionals Workshop, Dallas, TX,
November 2018.
[6] T.
Gamblin,
M.
LeGendre,
M.
R.
Collette,
G.
L.
Lee,
A.
Moody,
B.
R.
de
Supinski,
and
S.
Futral,
“The
Spack
package
manager:
bringing
order
to
HPC
software
chaos,”
in
SC15: International Conference for High-Performance Computing,
Networking,
Storage
and
Analysis.
Los
Alamitos,
CA,
USA:
IEEE Computer Society, nov 2015, pp. 1–12. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.ieeecomputersociety.org/10.1145/2807591.2807623
[7] NVIDIA,
“NVIDIA
container
runtime.”
[Online].
Available:
https://github.com/NVIDIA/nvidia-container-runtime
[8] L. Benedicic, F. A. Cruz, A. Madonna, and K. Mariotti, “Sarus: Highly
scalable Docker containers for HPC systems,” in High Performance
Computing, M. Weiland, G. Juckeland, S. Alam, and H. Jagode, Eds.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2019, pp. 46–60.
[9] S. Canon and D. Jacobsen, “Shifter: Containers for HPC,” Proceedings
of Cray Users Group, 2016.
[10] E. Gabriel, G. E. Fagg, G. Bosilca, T. Angskun, J. J. Dongarra, J. M.
Squyres, V. Sahay, P. Kambadur, B. Barrett, A. Lumsdaine, R. H.
Castain, D. J. Daniel, R. L. Graham, and T. S. Woodall, “Open MPI:
Goals, concept, and design of a next generation MPI implementation,”
in Proceedings, 11th European PVM/MPI Users’ Group Meeting, Bu-
dapest, Hungary, September 2004, pp. 97–104.
[11] PMIx Community, “PMIx Reference RunTime environment (PRRTE),”
https://github.com/openpmix/prrte, 2020.
[12] Argonne National Laboratory, “Hydra process management framework,”
https://wiki.mpich.org/mpich/index.php/Hydra Process
Management Framework, 2014, [Online; accessed 26-Apr-2017].
[13] IBM,
“Conﬁgure
and
use
LSF
integrations
for
containers.”
https://www.ibm.com/support/knowledgecenter/en/SSWRJV 10.1.0/
lsf welcome/lsf kc containers.html, 2019, [Online; accessed 25-Apr-
2019].
[14] R. H. Castain, D. Solt, J. Hursey, and A. Bouteiller, “PMIx: Process
management for exascale environments,” in Proceedings of the 24th
European MPI Users’ Group Meeting, ser. EuroMPI ’17.
New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2017, pp. 14:1–14:10. [Online]. Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/3127024.3127027
[15] PMIx
Community,
“OpenPMIx
Reference
Library,”
https://openpmix.github.io/, 2020.
[16] C.
Yeoh,
“Cross
memory
attach.”
[Online].
Available:
https://lwn.net/Articles/405284/
[17] F. Broquedis, J. Clet-Ortega, S. Moreaud, N. Furmento, B. Goglin,
G. Mercier, S. Thibault, and R. Namyst, “Hwloc: A generic framework
for managing hardware afﬁnities in hpc applications,” in Proceedings
of the 2010 18th Euromicro Conference on Parallel, Distributed and
Network-based Processing, ser. PDP ’10.
Washington, DC, USA:
IEEE Computer Society, 2010, pp. 180–186. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/PDP.2010.67
[18] A. M. Beltre, P. Saha, M. Govindaraju, A. Younge, and R. E. Grant,
“Enabling HPC workloads on cloud infrastructure using Kubernetes
container orchestration mechanisms,” in 2019 IEEE/ACM International
Workshop on Containers and New Orchestration Paradigms for Isolated
Environments in HPC (CANOPIE-HPC), 2019, pp. 11–20.
[19] R. S. Canon and A. Younge, “A case for portability and reproducibility
of HPC containers,” in 2019 IEEE/ACM International Workshop on
Containers and New Orchestration Paradigms for Isolated Environments
in HPC (CANOPIE-HPC), 2019, pp. 49–54.
[20] MPI Forum, “MPI3 ABI mailing list archive.” [Online]. Available:
https://lists.mpi-forum.org/pipermail/mpi3-abi/
[21] P. Shamis, M. G. Venkata, M. G. Lopez, M. B. Baker, O. Hernandez,
Y. Itigin, M. Dubman, G. Shainer, R. L. Graham, L. Liss, Y. Shahar,
S. Potluri, D. Rossetti, D. Becker, D. Poole, C. Lamb, S. Kumar,
C. Stunkel, G. Bosilca, and A. Bouteiller, “UCX: An open source
framework for HPC network APIs and beyond,” in Proceedings of the
2015 IEEE 23rd Annual Symposium on High-Performance Interconnects,
ser. HOTI ’15.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2015,
pp. 40–43. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/HOTI.2015.13
[22] J.
M.
Squyres,
“Open
MPI,”
The
Architecture
of
Open
Source Applications, Volume II, May 2012. [Online]. Available:
https://www.aosabook.org/en/openmpi.html
[23] Red
Hat,
“Red
Hat
Enterprise
Linux
CoreOS
(RHCOS),”
https://access.redhat.com/documentation/en-
us/openshift container platform/4.3/html/architecture/architecture-
rhcos, 2020.
[24] “Kubernetes issue 3595: rlimit support,” January 2015. [Online].
Available: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/3595
[25] K.
Ahmed,
“Bridging
HPC
and
cloud
native
development
with
Kubernetes.”
[Online].
Available:
https://www.hpcwire.com/solution content/ibm/cross-industry/bridging-
hpc-and-cloud-native-development-with-kubernetes/
43
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 29,2021 at 23:49:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 


[26] J. Hursey and S. Miller, “Running InﬁniBand and GPU accelerated MPI
applications in a Kubernetes environment,” in 2019 IEEE/ACM Interna-
tional Workshop on Containers and New Orchestration Paradigms for
Isolated Environments in HPC (CANOPIE-HPC), 2019. [Online]. Avail-
able:
https://www.canopie-hpc.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/MPI-
and-k8s-with-ParallelJob-2019-11-sc-workshop.pdf
[27] M. Korupolu and S. Chatterjee, “Production multi-node jobs with
gang
scheduling,
K8s,
GPUs
and
RDMA.”
[Online].
Available:
https://sched.co/ZejQ
[28] N. Hjelm, H. Pritchard, S. K. Guti´errez, D. J. Holmes, R. Castain, and
A. Skjellum, “MPI Sessions: Evaluation of an implementation in Open
MPI,” in 2019 IEEE International Conference on Cluster Computing
(CLUSTER), 2019, pp. 1–11.
44
Authorized licensed use limited to: Carleton University. Downloaded on May 29,2021 at 23:49:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
