 
 
Approved for public release; further dissemination unlimited 
Preprint 
    UCRL-JC-147996
SLURM: Simple Linux 
Utility for Resource 
Management 
Morris A. Jette, Andy B. Yoo, and Mark Grondona 
This article was submitted to  
Workshop on Job Scheduling Strategies for Parallel Processing, 
Seattle, WA, June 24, 2003 
April 3, 2003 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
DISCLAIMER 
 
This document was prepared as an account of work sponsored by an agency of the United States 
Government.  Neither the United States Government nor the University of California nor any of their 
employees, makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the 
accuracy, completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or 
represents that its use would not infringe privately owned rights. Reference herein to any specific 
commercial product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not 
necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States 
Government or the University of California.  The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not 
necessarily state or reflect those of the United States Government or the University of California, and shall 
not be used for advertising or product endorsement purposes. 
 
This is a preprint of a paper intended for publication in a journal or proceedings. Since changes may be 
made before publication, this preprint is made available with the understanding that it will not be cited or 
reproduced without the permission of the author. 
 
 
This report has been reproduced directly from the best available copy. 
 
Available electronically at http://www.doc.gov/bridge 
 
Available for a processing fee to U.S. Department of Energy 
And its contractors in paper from 
U.S. Department of Energy 
Office of Scientific and Technical Information 
P.O. Box 62 
Oak Ridge, TN 37831-0062 
Telephone:  (865) 576-8401 
Facsimile:  (865) 576-5728 
E-mail: reports@adonis.osti.gov 
 
Available for the sale to the public from 
U.S. Department of Commerce 
National Technical Information Service 
5285 Port Royal Road 
Springfield, VA 22161 
Telephone:  (800) 553-6847 
Facsimile:  (703) 605-6900 
E-mail: orders@ntis.fedworld.gov 
Online ordering: http://www.ntis.gov/ordering.htm 
 
 
OR 
 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory 
Technical Information Department’s Digital Library 
http://www.llnl.gov/tid/Library.html 
 
 


SLURM: Simple Linux Utility for Resource Management∗
Morris A. Jette
Andy B. Yoo
Mark Grondona
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Livermore, CA 94551
{jette1 | yoo2 | mgrondona}@llnl.gov
Abstract
A new cluster resource management system called Simple Linux Utility Resource
Management (SLURM) is developed and presented in this paper. SLURM, initially
developed for large Linux clusters at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
(LLNL), is a simple cluster manager that can scale to thousands of processors. SLURM
is designed to be ﬂexible and fault-tolerant and can be ported to other clusters of diﬀer-
ent size and architecture with minimal eﬀort. We are certain that SLURM will beneﬁt
both users and system architects by providing them with a simple, robust, and highly
scalable parallel job execution environment for their cluster system.
1
Introduction
Linux clusters, often constructed by using commodity oﬀ-the-shelf (COTS) componnets,
have become increasingly populuar as a computing platform for parallel computation in
recent years, mainly due to their ability to deliver high perfomance-cost ratio. Researchers
have built and used small to medium size clusters for developing and debugging applica-
tionsd [3, 15]. Now, continuous decrease in the price of the COTS parts in conjunction with
the good scalability of the cluster architecture has made it feasible to economically build
large-scale clusters with thousands of processors [17, 18].
An essential component that is needed to run user applications on a cluster is cluster
management system. A cluster management system (or cluster manager) performs such
crucial tasks as scheduling user jobs, monitoring machine and job ststus, launching user
∗This document was prepared as an account of work sponsored by an agency of the United States Gov-
ernment. Neither the United States Government nor the University of California nor any of their employees,
makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal liability or responsibility for the accuracy,
completeness, or usefulness of any information, apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that
its use would not infringe privately owned rights.
Reference herein to any speciﬁc commercial product,
process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not necessarily constitute or
imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States Government or the University of
California. The views and opinions of authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or reﬂect those of the
United States Government or the University of California, and shall not be used for advertising or product
endorsement purposes. This work was performed under the auspices of the U. S. Department of Energy by
the University of California, Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory under Contract No. W-7405-Eng-48.
Document UCRL-TBD.
1


applications, and managing machine conﬁguration, An ideal cluster manager should be
simple, eﬃcient, scalable, and fault-tolerant.
Unfortunately, there are no open-source or proprietary cluster management systems cur-
rently available, which satisfy these requirements while being immediately available for
clusters of any architecture. A survey [10] has revealed that the existing cluster managers
have poor scalability and hence they are not suitable for large clusters of thousands of
processors [12, 9]. Many of these cluster managers also cannot be easily ported to other
clusters since they are tied to speciﬁc components of the cluster that they are targeted
to [20, 12, 9]. Furthermore, their cluster management functionality is usually provided as
a part of a speciﬁc job scheduling system package. This mandates the use of the given
scheduler just to manage a cluster, even though the scheduler does not necessarily meet
the need of organization that hosts the cluster. Clear separation of the cluster management
functionality from scheduling policy is desired.
This observation led us to set out to design a simple, highly scalable, and portable cluster
management system that performs the core of cluster resource management functions. The
result of this eﬀort is Simple Linux Utility Resource Management (SLURM1). SLURM was
developed with the following design goals:
• Simplicity: SLURM is simple enough to allow motivated end-users to understand its
source code and add functionality.
The authors will avoid the temptation to add
features unless they are of general appeal.
• Open Source: SLURM is available to everyone and will remain free. Its source code
is distributed under the GNU General Public License [8].
• Portability: SLURM is written in the C language, with a GNU autoconf conﬁgura-
tion engine.
While initially written for Linux, other UNIX-like operating systems
should be easy porting targets. SLURM also supports a general purpose plugin mech-
anism, which permits a variety of diﬀerent infrastructures to be easily supported. The
SLURM conﬁguration ﬁle speciﬁes which set of plugin modules should be used.
• Interconnect independence: SLURM supports UDP/IP based communication as well
as the Quadrics Elan3 and Myrinet interconnects. Adding support for other intercon-
nects is straightforward and utilizes the plugin mechanism described above.
• Scalability: SLURM is designed for scalability to clusters of thousands of nodes. Jobs
may specify their resource requirements in a variety of ways including requirements
options and ranges, potentially permitting faster initiation than otherwise possible.
• Robustness: SLURM can handle a variety of failure modes without terminating work-
loads, including crashes of the node running the SLURM controller. User jobs may
be conﬁgured to continue execution despite the failure of one or more nodes on which
they are executing. Nodes allocated to a job are available for reuse as soon as the
job(s) allocated to that node terminate. If some nodes fail to complete job termina-
tion in a timely fashion due to hardware of software problems, only the scheduling of
those tardy nodes will be eﬀected.
1A tip of the hat to Matt Groening and creators of Futurama, where Slurm is the most popular carbonated
beverage in the universe.
2


• Secure: SLURM employs crypto technology to authenticate users to services and ser-
vices to each other with a variety of options available through the plugin mechanism.
SLURM does not assume that its networks are physically secure, but does assume
that the entire cluster is within a single administrative domain with a common user
base across the entire cluster.
• System administrator friendly: SLURM is conﬁgured a simple conﬁguration ﬁle and
minimizes distributed state. Its conﬁguration may be changed at any time without
impacting running jobs. Heterogeneous nodes within a cluster may be easily managed.
SLURM interfaces are usable by scripts and its behavior is highly deterministic.
The main contribution of our work is that we have provided a readily available and
inexpensive tool that anybody can use to eﬃciently manage clusters of diﬀerent size and
architecture. The SLURM is highly scalable2. The SLURM can be easily ported to any
cluster system with minimal eﬀort with its plug-in capability and can be used with any
meta-batch scheduler or even a Grid resource broker [7] with its well-deﬁned interfaces.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the architecture of
SLURM in detail. Section 3 discusses the services provided by SLURM followed by perfor-
mance study of SLURM in Section 4. Brief survey of existing cluster management systems
is presented in Section 5. Concluding remarks and future development plan of SLURM is
given in Section 6.
2
SLURM Architecture
As a cluster resource manager, SLURM has three key functions. First, it allocates exclusive
and/or non-exclusive access to resources to users for some duration of time so they can
perform work. Second, it provides a framework for starting, executing, and monitoring
work on the set of allocated nodes. Finally, it arbitrates conﬂicting requests for resources
by managing a queue of pending work.
Users and system administrators interact with
SLURM using simple commands.
Figure 1 depicts the key components of SLURM. As shown in Figure 1, SLURM consists
of a slurmd daemon running on each compute node, a central slurmctld daemon running
on a management node (with optional fail-over twin), and ﬁve command line utilities, which
can run anywhere in the cluster.
The entities managed by these SLURM daemons include nodes, the compute resource
in SLURM, partitions, which group nodes into logical disjoint sets, jobs, or allocations of
resources assigned to a user for a speciﬁed amount of time, and job steps, which are sets
of tasks within a job. Each job is allocated nodes within a single partition. Once a job is
assigned a set of nodes, the user is able to initiate parallel work in the form of job steps
in any conﬁguration within the allocation. For instance a single job step may be started
which utilizes all nodes allocated to the job, or several job steps may independently use a
portion of the allocation.
2It was observed that it took less than two seconds for SLURM to launch a thousand-task job on a large
cluster currently being built for Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.
3


scancel
sinfo
squeue
 srun 
slurmctld
(primary)
slurmctld
(backup)
slurmd
slurmd
slurmd
scontrol
User
Commands
Compute Node Daemons
Controller Daemons
Administrator
Command
Figure 1: SLURM Architecture
Figure 2 exposes the subsystems that are implemented within the slurmd and slurmctld
daemons. These subsystems are explained in more detail below.
2.1
SLURM Local Daemon (Slurmd)
The slurmd is a multi-threaded daemon running on each compute node.
It reads the
common SLURM conﬁguration ﬁle, notiﬁes the controller that it is active, waits for work,
executes the work, returns status,then waits for more work. Since it initiates jobs for other
users, it must run with root privilege. It also asynchronously exchanges node and job status
information with slurmctld. The only job information it has at any given time pertains to
its currently executing jobs. The slurmd performs ﬁve major tasks.
• Machine and Job Status Services: Respond to controller requests for machine and job
state information, and send asynchronous reports of some state changes (e.g. slurmd
startup) to the controller.
• Remote Execution: Start, monitor, and clean up after a set of processes (typically be-
longing to a parallel job) as dictated by the slurmctld daemon or an srun or scancel
command. Starting a process may include executing a prolog program, setting process
limits, setting real and eﬀective user id, establishing environment variables, setting
working directory, allocating interconnect resources, setting core ﬁle paths, initializing
the Stream Copy Service, and managing process groups. Terminating a process may
include terminating all members of a process group and executing an epilog program.
• Stream Copy Service: Allow handling of stderr, stdout, and stdin of remote tasks. Job
input may be redirected from a ﬁle or ﬁles, a srun process, or /dev/null. Job output
may be saved into local ﬁles or sent back to the srun command. Regardless of the
4


Partition Manager
Node Manager
Job Manager
slurmctld
srun
User:
slurmd
Job 
Status
Machine 
Status
Job
Control
Remote
Execution
Globus and/or
Metascheduler
(optional)
Stream Copy
Figure 2: SLURM Architecture - Subsystems
location of stdout or stderr, all job output is locally buﬀered to avoid blocking local
tasks.
• Job Control: Allow asynchronous interaction with the Remote Execution environ-
ment by propagating signals or explicit job termination requests to any set of locally
managed processes.
2.2
SLURM Central Daemon (Slurmctld)
Most SLURM state information is maintained by the controller, slurmctld. The slurmctld
is multi-threaded with independent read and write locks for the various data structures to
enhance scalability. When slurmctld starts, it reads the SLURM conﬁguration ﬁle. It
also can read additional state information from a checkpoint ﬁle generated by a previous
execution of slurmctld. Full controller state information is written to disk periodically
with incremental changes written to disk immediately for fault-tolerance. The slurmctld
runs in either master or standby mode, depending on the state of its fail-over twin, if any.
The
slurmctld need not execute with root privilege. The slurmctld consists of three major
components:
• Node Manager: Monitors the state of each node in the cluster.
It polls slurmd’s
for status periodically and receives state change notiﬁcations from slurmd daemons
asynchronously. It ensures that nodes have the prescribed conﬁguration before being
considered available for use.
• Partition Manager: Groups nodes into non-overlapping sets called partitions. Each
partition can have associated with it various job limits and access controls. The par-
tition manager also allocates nodes to jobs based upon node and partition states and
5


conﬁgurations. Requests to initiate jobs come from the Job Manager. The scontrol
may be used to administratively alter node and partition conﬁgurations.
• Job Manager: Accepts user job requests and places pending jobs in a priority ordered
queue. The Job Manager is awakened on a periodic basis and whenever there is a
change in state that might permit a job to begin running, such as job completion, job
submission, partition-up transition, node-up transition, etc. The Job Manager then
makes a pass through the priority-ordered job queue. The highest priority jobs for
each partition are allocated resources as possible. As soon as an allocation failure
occurs for any partition, no lower-priority jobs for that partition are considered for
initiation. After completing the scheduling cycle, the Job Manager’s scheduling thread
sleeps. Once a job has been allocated resources, the Job Manager transfers necessary
state information to those nodes, permitting it to commence execution. When the
Job Manager detects that all nodes associated with a job have completed their work,
it initiates clean-up and performs another scheduling cycle as described above.
3
SLURM Operation and Services
3.1
Command Line Utilities
The command line utilities are the user interface to SLURM functionality. They oﬀer users
access to remote execution and job control. They also permit administrators to dynamically
change the system conﬁguration. These commands all use SLURM APIs which are directly
available for more sophisticated applications.
• scancel: Cancel a running or a pending job or job step, subject to authentication
and authorization. This command can also be used to send an arbitrary signal to all
processes on all nodes associated with a job or job step.
• scontrol: Perform privileged administrative commands such as draining a node or
partition in preparation for maintenance.
Many scontrol functions can only be
executed by privileged users.
• sinfo: Display a summary of partition and node information. A assortment of ﬁlter-
ing and output format options are available.
• squeue: Display the queue of running and waiting jobs and/or job steps. A wide
assortment of ﬁltering, sorting, and output format options are available.
• srun: Allocate resources, submit jobs to the SLURM queue, and initiate parallel tasks
(job steps). Every set of executing parallel tasks has an associated srun which initiated
it and, if the srun persists, managing it. Jobs may be submitted for batch execution,
in which case srun terminates after job submission. Jobs may also be submitted for
interactive execution, where srun keeps running to shepherd the running job. In this
case, srun negotiates connections with remote slurmd’s for job initiation and to get
stdout and stderr, forward stdin, and respond to signals from the user. The srun may
also be instructed to allocate a set of resources and spawn a shell with access to those
resources.
6


3.2
Plugins
In order to make the use of diﬀerent infrastructures possible, SLURM uses a general purpose
plugin mechanism. A SLURM plugin is a dynamically linked code object which is loaded
explicitly at run time by the SLURM libraries. A plugin provides a customized impleme-
nation of a well-deﬁned API connected to tasks such as authentication, interconnect fabric,
task scheduling. A set of functions is deﬁned for use by all of the diﬀerent infrastructures
of a particular variety. For example, the authentication plugin must deﬁne functions such
as: slurm auth activate to create a credential, slurm auth verify to verify a credential
to approve or deny authentication, slurm auth get uid to get the user ID associated with
a speciﬁc credential. It also must deﬁne the data structure used, a plugin type, a plugin
version number. The available plugins are deﬁned in the conﬁguration ﬁle.
3.3
Communications Layer
SLURM presently uses Berkeley sockets for communications. However, we anticipate using
the plugin mechanism to easily permit use of other communications layers. At LLNL we are
using an Ethernet for SLURM communications and the Quadrics Elan switch exclusively for
user applications. The SLURM conﬁguration ﬁle permits the identiﬁcation of each node’s
hostname as well as its name to be used for communications.
While SLURM is able to manage 1000 nodes without diﬃculty using sockets and Eth-
ernet, we are reviewing other communication mechanisms which may oﬀer improved scal-
ability. One possible alternative is STORM[?]. STORM uses the cluster interconnect and
Network Interface Cards to provide high-speed communications including a broadcast ca-
pability. STORM only supports the Quadrics Elan interconnnect at present, but does oﬀer
the promise of improved performance and scalability.
3.4
Security
SLURM has a simple security model: Any user of the cluster may submit parallel jobs
to execute and cancel his own jobs. Any user may view SLURM conﬁguration and state
information. Only privileged users may modify the SLURM conﬁguration, cancel any jobs,
or perform other restricted activities. Privileged users in SLURM include the users root
and SlurmUser (as deﬁned in the SLURM conﬁguration ﬁle).
If permission to modify
SLURM conﬁguration is required by others, set-uid programs may be used to grant speciﬁc
permissions to speciﬁc users.
We presently support three authentication mechanisms via plugins: authd[?], munged
and none. A plugin can easily be developed for Kerberos or authentication mechanisms as
desired. The munged implementation is described below. A munged daemon running as user
root on each node conﬁrms the identify of the user making the request using the getpeername
function and generates a credential. The credential contains a user ID, group ID, time-
stamp, lifetime, some pseudo-random information, and any user supplied information. The
munged uses a private key to generate a Message Authentication Code (MAC) for the
credential.
The munged then uses a public key to symmetrically encrypt the credential
including the MAC. SLURM daemons and programs transmit this encrypted credential with
communications. The SLURM daemon receiving the message sends the credential to munged
7


srun
slurmctld
slurmd
slurmd
slurmd
ephemeral port
‘‘known’’ port
1.
2.
3.
4.
Figure 3: Job initiation connections overview. 1. The srun connects to slurmctld requesting
resources. 2. slurmctld issues a response, with list of nodes and job credential. 3. The srun opens
a listen port for every task in the job step, then sends a run job step request to slurmd. 4. slurmd’s
initiate job step and connect back to srun for stdout/err.
on that node. The munged decrypts the credential using its private key, validates it and
returns the user ID and group ID of the user originating the credential. The munged prevents
replay of a credential on any single node by recording credentials that have already been
authenticated. In SLURM’s case, the user supplied information includes node identiﬁcation
information to prevent a credential from being used on nodes it is not destined for.
When resources are allocated to a user by the controller, a job step credential is generated
by combining the user ID, job ID, step ID, the list of resources allocated (nodes), and the
credential lifetime. This job step credential is encrypted with a slurmctld private key. This
credential is returned to the requesting agent (srun) along with the allocation response, and
must be forwarded to the remote slurmd’s upon job step initiation. slurmd decrypts this
credential with the slurmctld’s public key to verify that the user may access resources on
the local node. slurmd also uses this job step credential to authenticate standard input,
output, and error communication streams.
3.5
Job Initiation
There are three modes in which jobs may be run by users under SLURM. The ﬁrst and most
simple is interactive mode, in which stdout and stderr are displayed on the user’s terminal
in real time, and stdin and signals may be forwarded from the terminal transparently to
the remote tasks. The second is batch mode, in which the job is queued until the request
for resources can be satisﬁed, at which time the job is run by SLURM as the submitting
user. In allocate mode, a job is allocated to the requesting user, under which the user may
manually run job steps via a script or in a sub-shell spawned by srun.
8


User
slurmctld
slurmd
register job step
register job step reply
run job step req
run job step reply
job_thr
task_thr
connect(stdout/err)
task exit msg
release allocation
run epilog req
run epilog reply
srun
status req (periodic)
status reply
exit 
status
cmd
srun cmd
prolog
epilog
Figure 4:
Interactive job initiation.
srun simultaneously allocates nodes and a job step from
slurmctld then sends a run request to all slurmd’s in job.
Dashed arrows indicate a periodic
request that may or may not occur during the lifetime of the job.
Figure 3 gives a high-level depiction of the connections that occur between SLURM
components during a general interactive job startup. The srun requests a resource allocation
and job step initiation from the slurmctld, which responds with the job ID, list of allocated
nodes, job credential. if the request is granted. The srun then initializes listen ports for
each task and sends a message to the slurmd’s on the allocated nodes requesting that the
remote processes be initiated. The slurmd’s begin execution of the tasks and connect back
to srun for stdout and stderr. This process and the other initiation modes are described in
more detail below.
3.5.1
Interactive mode initiation
Interactive job initiation is illustrated in Figure 4. The process begins with a user invoking
srun in interactive mode. In Figure 4, the user has requested an interactive run of the
executable “cmd” in the default partition.
After processing command line options, srun sends a message to slurmctld requesting
a resource allocation and a job step initiation. This message simultaneously requests an
allocation (or job) and a job step. The srun waits for a reply from slurmctld, which may
not come instantly if the user has requested that srun block until resources are available.
When resources are available for the user’s job, slurmctld replies with a job step credential,
list of nodes that were allocated, cpus per node, and so on. The srun then sends a message
each slurmd on the allocated nodes requesting that a job step be initiated. The slurmd’s
verify that the job is valid using the forwarded job step credential and then respond to
srun.
Each slurmd invokes a job thread to handle the request, which in turn invokes a task
9


srun
slurmctld
slurmd
slurmd
batch req
batch reply
run req
job_thr
task_thr
srun
run reply
job step req
job step reply
cmd
release step reply
release step
task exit msg
run epilog req
run epilog reply
script
User
submit
exit status
job
queued
srun batch
prolog
epilog
Figure 5: Queued job initiation. slurmctld initiates the user’s job as a batch script on one node.
Batch script contains an srun call which initiates parallel tasks after instantiating job step with
controller. The shaded region is a compressed representation and is illustrated in more detail in the
interactive diagram (Figure 4).
thread for each requested task. The task thread connects back to a port opened by srun
for stdout and stderr. The host and port for this connection is contained in the run request
message sent to this machine by srun.
Once stdout and stderr have successfully been
connected, the task thread takes the necessary steps to initiate the user’s executable on
the node, initializing environment, current working directory, and interconnect resources if
needed.
Once the user process exits, the task thread records the exit status and sends a task exit
message back to srun. When all local processes terminate, the job thread exits. The srun
process either waits for all tasks to exit, or attempt to clean up the remaining processes
some time after the ﬁrst task exits. Regardless, once all tasks are ﬁnished, srun sends a
message to the slurmctld releasing the allocated nodes, then exits with an appropriate exit
status.
When the slurmctld receives notiﬁcation that srun no longer needs the allocated nodes,
it issues a request for the epilog to be run on each of the slurmd’s in the allocation. As
slurmd’s report that the epilog ran successfully, the nodes are returned to the partition.
3.5.2
Batch mode initiation
Figure 5 illustrates the initiation of a batch job in SLURM. Once a batch job is submitted,
srun sends a batch job request to slurmctld that contains the input/output location for the
job, current working directory, environment, requested number of nodes. The slurmctld
queues the request in its priority ordered queue.
10


User
slurmctld
slurmd
allocate req
allocate reply
run job step req
job step reply
job_thr
task_thr
connect(stdout/err)
task exit msg
srun
exit 
status
cmd
srun allocate
srun
job step req
sh
run job step reply
release allocation
run epilog req
run epilog reply
release job step
job/job step status
prolog
epilog
Figure 6: Job initiation in allocate mode. Resources are allocated and srun spawns a shell with
access to the resources. When user runs an srun from within the shell, the a job step is initiated
under the allocation.
Once the resources are available and the job has a high enough priority, slurmctld
allocates the resources to the job and contacts the ﬁrst node of the allocation requesting
that the user job be started. In this case, the job may either be another invocation of srun
or a job script which may have multiple invocations of srun within it. The slurmd on the
remote node responds to the run request, initiating the job thread, task thread, and user
script. An srun executed from within the script detects that it has access to an allocation
and initiates a job step on some or all of the nodes within the job.
Once the job step is complete, the srun in the job script notiﬁes the slurmctld and
terminates. The job script continues executing and may initiate further job steps. Once
the job script completes, the task thread running the job script collects the exit status and
sends a task exit message to the slurmctld. The slurmctld notes that the job is complete
and requests that the job epilog be run on all nodes that were allocated. As the slurmd’s
respond with successful completion of the epilog, the nodes are returned to the partition.
3.5.3
Allocate mode initiation
In allocate mode, the user wishes to allocate a job and interactively run job steps under that
allocation. The process of initiation in this mode is illustrated in Figure 6. The invoked
srun sends an allocate request to slurmctld, which, if resources are available, responds
with a list of nodes allocated, job id, etc. The srun process spawns a shell on the user’s
terminal with access to the allocation, then waits for the shell to exit at which time the job
is considered complete.
11


An srun initiated within the allocate sub-shell recognizes that it is running under an
allocation and therefore already within a job. Provided with no other arguments, srun
started in this manner initiates a job step on all nodes within the current job. However,
the user may select a subset of these nodes implicitly.
An srun executed from the sub-shell reads the environment and user options, then notify
the controller that it is starting a job step under the current job. The slurmctld registers
the job step and responds with a job credential. The srun then initiates the job step using
the same general method as described in the section on interactive job initiation.
When the user exits the allocate sub-shell, the original srun receives exit status, notiﬁes
slurmctld that the job is complete, and exits. The controller runs the epilog on each of
the allocated nodes, returning nodes to the partition as they complete the epilog.
4
Related Work
Portable Batch System (PBS)
The Portable Batch System (PBS) [19] is a ﬂexible batch queuing and workload manage-
ment system originally developed by Veridian Systems for NASA. It operates on networked,
multi-platform UNIX environments, including heterogeneous clusters of workstations, su-
percomputers, and massively parallel systems. PBS was developed as a replacement for
NQS (Network Queuing System) by many of the same people.
PBS supports sophisticated scheduling logic (via the Maui Scheduler3). PBS spawn’s
daemons on each machine to shepherd the job’s tasks. It provides an interface for admin-
istrators to easily interface their own scheduling modules. PBS can support long delays
in ﬁle staging with retry. Host authentication is provided by checking port numbers (low
ports numbers are only accessible to user root). Credential service is used for user authen-
tication. It has the job prolog and epilog feature. PBS Supports high priority queue for
smaller ”interactive” jobs. Signal to daemons causes current log ﬁle to be closed, renamed
with time-stamp, and a new log ﬁle created.
Although the PBS is portable and has broad user base, it has following drawbacks. First,
PBS is implementted using single thread and hence exhibits poor performance especially
when a compute node in the system dies in which case the PBS tries to contact down
nodes, while other activities must wait. Second, PBS has weak mechanism for starting and
cleaning up parallel jobs. Finally, the PBS has very poor scalability and is not suitable for
large clusters.
Maui Scheduler
Maui Scheduler [16] is an advance reservation HPC batch scheduler for use with SP, O2K,
and UNIX/Linux clusters.
It is widely used to extend the functionality of PBS and
LoadLeveler
3http://superclustergroup.org/maui
12


Distributed Production Control System (DPCS)
The Distributed Production Control System (DPCS) [6] is a resource manager developed at
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL). The DPCS provides basic data collection
and reporting mechanisms for prject-level, near real-time accounting and resource alloca-
tion to customers with established limits per customers’ organization budgets, In addition,
the DPCS evenly distributes workload across available computers and supports dynamic
reconﬁguration and graceful degradation of service to prevent overuse of a computer where
not authorized.
While DPCS does have these attractive characteristics, it supports only a limited number
of computer systems: IBM RS/6000 and SP, Linux with RMS, Sun Solaris, and Compaq
Alpha. DPCS also lacks commercial support.
LoadLeveler
LoadLeveler citeLoadLevelerManual,LoadLevelerWeb is a proprietary batch system and
parallel job manager by IBM. LoadLeveler supports few non-IBM systems. Very primi-
tive scheduling software exists and other software is required for reasonable performance
such as Maui Scheduler and DPCS. The LoadLeveler is simple and very ﬂexible queue and
job class structure is available operating in ”matrix” fashion. The biggest problem of the
LoadLeveler is its extremely poor scalability. It was observed that it took more than 20
minutes to start-up a 512-task job using LoadLeveler on one of the IBM SP machines at
LLNL. In addition, all jobs must be initiated through the LoadLeveler, and a special version
of MPI is requested to run a parallel job.
Load Sharing Facility (LSF)
LSF [13] is a proprietary batch system and parallel job manager by Platform Computing.
Widely deployed on a wide variety of computer architectures, it has sophisticated schedul-
ing software including fair-share, backﬁll, consumable resources, an job preemption and
very ﬂexible queue structure. It also provides good status information on nodes and LSF
daemons. The LSF share many of its shortcomings with the LoadLeveler: job initiation
only through LSF, requirement of a spwcial MPI library, etc.
Condor
Condor [5, ?, 1] is a batch system and parallel job manager developed by the University
of Wisconsin. Condor was the basis for IBM’s LoadLeveler and both share very similar
underlying infrastructure. Condor has a very sophisticated checkpoint/restart service that
does not rely upon kernel changes, but a variety of library changes (which prevent it from
being completely general). The Condor checkpoint/restart service has been integrated into
LSF, Codine, and DPCS. Condor is designed to operate across a heterogeneous environment,
mostly to harness the compute resources of workstations and PCs. It has an interesting
”advertising” service. Servers advertise their available resources and consumers advertise
their requirements for a broker to perform matches. The checkpoint mechanism is used to
relocate work on demand (when the ”owner” of a desktop machine wants to resume work).
13


Memory Channel
Memory Channel is a high-speed interconnect developed by Digital/Compaq with related
software for parallel job execution. Special version of MPI required. The application spawns
tasks on other nodes.
These tasks connect themselves to the high speed interconnect.
No system level tool to spawns the tasks, allocates interconnect resources, or otherwise
manages the parallel job (Note: This is sometimes a problem when jobs fail, requiring system
administrators to release interconnect resources.
There are also performance problems
related to resource sharing).
Linux PAGG Process Aggregates
PAGG [11] consists of modiﬁcations to the linux kernel that allows developers to implement
Process AGGregates as loadable kernel modules. A process aggregate is deﬁned as a col-
lection of processes that are all members of the same set. A set would be implemented as a
container for the member processes. For instance, process sessions and groups could have
been implemented as process aggregates.
Beowulf Distributed Process Space (BPROC)
The Beowulf Distributed Process Space (BPROC) is set of kernel modiﬁcations, utilities
and libraries which allow a user to start processes on other machines in a Beowulf-style
cluster [2]. Remote processes started with this mechanism appear in the process table of
the front end machine in a cluster. This allows remote process management using the normal
UNIX process control facilities. Signals are transparently forwarded to remote processes and
exit status is received using the usual wait() mechanisms.
LAM / MPI
Local Area Multicomputer (LAM) [14] is an MPI programming environment and develop-
ment system for heterogeneous computers on a network. With LAM, a dedicated cluster or
an existing network computing infrastructure can act as one parallel computer solving one
problem. LAM features extensive debugging support in the application development cycle
and peak performance for production applications. LAM features a full implementation of
the MPI communication standard.
5
Performance Study
We were able to perform some SLURM tests on a 1000 node cluster at LLNL. Some devel-
opment was still underway at that time and tuning had not been performed. The results
for executing simple ’hostname’ program on two tasks per node and various node counts
is show in Figure 7. We found SLURM performance to be comparable to the Quadrics
Resource Management System (RMS) [20] for all job sizes and about 80 times faster than
IBM LoadLeveler [12, 9] at tested job sizes.
14


0.1
1
10
1
2
4
8
16
32
64
128
256
512
950
Seconds
Nodes
SLURM
RMS
LoadLeveler
Figure 7: Time to execute /bin/hostname with various node counts
6
Conclusion and Future Plans
We have developed and presented SLURM, a simple, highly scalable, robust, and portable
cluster resource management system, in this paper. The contribution of this work is that
we have provided a immediately-available and inexpensive tool that virtually anybody can
use to eﬃciently manage clusters of diﬀerent size and architecture. We expect SLURM to
begin production use on LLNL Linux clusters starting in March 2003 and be available for
distribution shortly thereafter.
Looking ahead, we anticipate adding support for additional operating systems. We an-
ticipate adding a job preempt/resume capability, which will provide an external scheduler
the infrastructure required to perform gang scheduling, and a checkpoint/restart capability.
We also plan to use the SLURM for IBM’s Blue Gene/L platform [4] by incorporating a
capability to manage jobs on a three-dimensional torus machine into the SLURM.
Acknowledgments
Additional programmers are responsible for the development of SLURM include: Chris
Dunlap, Joey Ekstrom, Jim Garlick, Kevin Tew and Jay Windley.
15


References
[1] J. Basney, M. Livny, and T. Tannenbaum. High Throughput Computing with Condor.
HPCU news, 1(2), June 1997.
[2] Beowulf Distributed Process Space. http://bproc.sourceforge.net.
[3] Beowulf Project. http://www.beowulf.org.
[4] Blue Gene/L. http://cmg-rr.llnl.gov/asci/platforms/bluegenel.
[5] Condor. http://www.cs.wisc.edu/condor.
[6] Distributed Production Control System. http://www.llnl.gov/icc/lc/dpcs overview.html.
[7] I. Foster and C. Kesselman. The GRID: Blueprint for a New Computing Onfrastructure.
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc., 1999.
[8] GNU General Public License. http://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html.
[9] IBM Corporation. LoadLeveler’s User Guide, Release 2.1.
[10] M. Jette, C. Dunlap, J. Garlick, and M. Grondona.
Survey of Batch/Resource
Management-Related System Software. Technical report, Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory, 2202.
[11] Linux PAGG Process Aggregates. oss.sgi.com/projects/pagg.
[12] Load Leveler. http://www-1.ibm.com/servers/eservers/pseries/library/sp books/loadleveler.htm
[13] Load Sharing Facility. http://www.platform.com.
[14] Local Area Multicomputer. http://www.lam-mpi.org.
[15] Loki – Commodity Parallel Processing. http://loki-www.lanl.org.
[16] Maui Scheduler. mauischeduler.sourceforge.net.
[17] Multiprogrammatic Capability Cluster. http://www.llnl.gov/linux/mcr.
[18] Parallel Capacity Resource. http://www.llnl.gov/linux/pcr.
[19] Portable Batch System. http://www.openpbs.org.
[20] Quadircs Resource Management System. http://www.quadrics.com/website/pdf/rms.pdf.
16
