A Comparative Review of High-Performance 
Computing Major Cloud Service Providers 
Rawan Aljamal 
Computer Engineering Department 
The University of Jordan 
Amman, Jordan 
E-mail: r.aljamal@ju.edu.jo 
 
Ali El-Mousa 
Computer Engineering Department 
Princess Sumaya University for 
Technology 
Amman, Jordan 
a.elmousa@psut.edu.jo 
Fahed Jubair 
Computer Engineering Department 
The University of Jordan 
Amman, Jordan 
F.Jubair@ju.edu.jo
 
Abstract— This paper reviews the top leading cloud 
providers, surveys their offering related to High Performance 
Computing (HPC). Four top cloud provider are selected, 
Microsoft Windows Azure, Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud 
(Amazon EC2), Google Compute Engine and Oracle Cloud. Each 
one of them has its unique value proposition that enables it to 
survive in the market and make it a real competitor. A 
comparative analysis of the offerings and relative benefits of each 
are provided. This study is an introduction to our extensive work 
in the HPC field. 
Keywords— High-Performance Computing, Microsoft Azure, 
Amazon EC2, Google Compute, Oracle, price, performance. 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
1.1 High-Performance Computing on the cloud  
High-Performance Computing (HPC) on the cloud is one 
of the most trending research topics nowadays. Performing 
HPC jobs on the cloud is a cost effective solution that 
overcomes and replaces real dedicated cluster. Cloud 
architects focus on developing a potential alternative for costly 
real clusters that were used for this purpose for many years. 
Many big companies such as Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud 
(EC2), Microsoft Azure and Google invest hundreds of 
millions of dollars on cloud technology, delivering many 
scalable cloud computing solutions to serve users and satisfy 
their needs and expectations. Cloud computing providers use 
service-driven models. All hardware, platform and software 
resources are leased to customer on-demand [14]. Cloud 
providers offer services that can be classified into three types: 
Software as a Service (SaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS), 
and Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS). Amazon EC2 and 
Microsoft Azure are the most popular cloud providers. Both 
offer the IaaS platform. Both providers support a wide range 
of hardware and software varieties that complicate the 
selection of the compute node and its operating system [4]. 
1.2 Benefits of using cloud for High-Performance 
computing purposes 
Moving HPC applications from real traditional clusters to 
virtual cloud clusters has many benefits. It offers the 
Computing as a Service paradigm which enables HPC 
solutions to reach wide industrial and scientific communities. 
Cloud HPC guarantees exclusive execution of jobs without any 
interference with other user tasks. This feature enables HPC 
users to achieve maximum performance from leased resources. 
Cloud providers offer virtual machines with a heterogeneous 
configuration of processors, network and memory [4]. These 
benefits encourage all researchers in this domain to investigate 
the migration of HPC applications. Researchers now are 
studying all factors that affect executing applications on the 
cloud. The following benefits increase the value of cloud 
offerings; meanwhile, these advantages increase the value of 
research in this field. 
1. 
On-demand pricing. All resources used to build 
virtual clusters such as virtual machines, storage accounts, 
connected networks, network addresses etc. are priced 
based on the usage time of resources, (Dollar per hour). 
However, if the reserved resources are underutilized or idle, 
users can manually turn off any unused resources, or the 
cloud provider can automate this process when the usage of 
the resources drop to a certain threshold. The payment 
policy in the cloud is pay as you go [3]. 
2. 
Elasticity. Cloud providers offer the Auto-Scale 
feature when deploying resources on the cloud. Resources 
will automatically expand or shrink to fit the currently 
executing jobs. This will reduce the underutilization of 
resources that may occur. In real clusters, resources remain 
idle and unused during weekends, nights and the time 
between major tasks execution. These features proves those 
cloud services, in general, are scalable and will reflect on 
the cost of running HPC jobs on the cloud [1]. 
3. 
Resources control, security, maintenance and 
management are the responsibility of the cloud 
provider. No need for a dedicated team to do regular 
maintenance, updates and upgrades. Machines are 
automatically upgraded by the provider team, which also 
reduces the operational cost usually paid to the IT and help 
desk team in real dedicated clusters [1].  
4. 
Cloud resources are reliable and guaranteed by 
the cloud provider. Services are on, reachable and 
operational all the time. Many replicas of resources are 
deployed. The redundancy policy is chosen according to 
user choice. Resources may be replicated in the same data 
center or in another one in the same geographical region or 
in another region. This will help systems to recover quickly 
in case of any unexpected crash or disaster [11]. 
5. 
Queuing time almost does not exist in virtual 
clusters. Resources are automatically created or released 
This work has been carried out during sabbatical leave granted to the author 
Ali El-Mousa from the University of Jordan during the academic year 2017. 
2018 9th International Conference on Information and Communication Systems (ICICS)
978-1-5386-4366-2/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE
181


based on the workload of the task. No more waiting in the 
cluster scheduler. This will reduce the total turnaround time 
of task execution [3]. 
6. 
Cost-effectiveness. Especially for small-to-medium 
size jobs. The cost of running these HPC applications on 
dedicated clusters is more expensive than leasing the same 
resources on the cloud [2]. 
7. 
RDMA Support. Remote Direct Memory Access 
(RDMA) also called one-sided communication. RDMA is 
used to read and write data from another node memory with 
minimum latency directly. This will reduce communication 
overhead and minimize the communication to computation 
ratio of an application [12]. 
1.3 Cloud providers market share  
Gartner, Inc. publishes a periodic magic quadrant every 
quarter. The Magic Quadrant of June 2017 as shown in Fig. 1, 
shows that the AWS cloud used by Amazon and the Azure 
cloud used by Microsoft dominate the field of IaaS. Both 
providers take almost all IaaS market share, while other 
providers are niche competitors. In this paper we survey the 
previous work done on these cloud providers, listing their 
current and up-to-date HPC services, and then we compare 
them to each other. This work aims to help cloud customers to 
select the best provider according to their applications. Prices 
are not listed in the comparison due to its fluctuation. The rest 
of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a 
literature review of HPC previous work on different cloud 
providers. Section 3 presents the top cloud providers that were 
selected to be discussed in this work. Discussion and 
comparison between the cloud providers are presented in 
Section 4. Section 5 contains the conclusion.    
II. 
RELATED WORK  
2.1 HPC application enables much academic research 
Scientists, researchers and engineers use HPC to solve 
many scientific and industrial problems. Cluster hardware is 
used efficiently to execute HPC applications in a short time. 
HPC can reduce the execution time of these applications from 
weeks or days to few hours. Past surveyed studies that will be 
presented in the next subsection shows that many different 
cluster architecture can be designed to work as HPC clusters. 
These clusters vary in specifications such as: computing 
resources, type of networks connected to it, disk size and type, 
memory size and many other deterministic parameters. As 
presented in [3], there is no one size fits all HPC virtual cluster. 
Consequently, not all benchmarks will execute with the same 
performance on all cluster architectures.  
2.2 Cloud Provider role in HPC 
High-Performance computing on the cloud architecture is 
one of the promising topics in research nowadays. Many 
researchers work in this field, studying the possibility of 
architecture improvement and the possibility of using it 
efficiently.  
2.2.1 HPC efficiency studies on Amazon EC2 cloud  
Many previous research about using cloud as a HPC 
environment was done on Amazon (EC2). Hence, it is the 
pioneer of the IaaS architecture in the cloud and one of the 
market leaders. Amazon shares the leadership with Microsoft 
Windows Azure and Google Engine clouds. These studies 
evaluated EC2 through many performance metrics such as: 
execution time and cost. Microsoft Azure is used as an HPC 
cluster provider but not much as Amazon EC2. The following 
subsection briefly explores these studies. 
2.2.2 Comparing Amazon EC2 cloud with the real on-
premises clusters 
 The work done in [2] provided a comprehensive study 
and evaluated the performance of many clusters that exist on 
EC2 cloud indicating the positive aspects of the cloud HPC 
cluster, such as: scalability and availability versus the cloud 
negative aspects such as virtualization, latency and low-speed 
networks compared with the relatively high computation 
capability. Many contributions are done in [4], the most 
important is the recommendation of disabling hyper threading 
in the cloud to enhance performance due to the sharing of the 
physical execution units between logical CPUs. This 
recommendation which was proved in [2], explained the effect 
of CPU affinity on the execution time and the performance. A 
problem occurs when using high scale clusters; EC2 does not 
assure the co-location of the virtual machines. When virtual 
machines are located in a different data center, the inter-
communication time will increase especially in tightly-coupled 
applications. This will degrade performance due to the long 
network connections between farther virtual [4]. Work 
submitted in [3], completed the previous work done in [4], and 
introduced a full, comparative study of using the cloud for 
HPC.  
 
Fig. 1. Gartner's Magic Quadrant for Cloud Infrastructure as a Service, 
Worldwide June 2017 
2018 9th International Conference on Information and Communication Systems (ICICS)
182


This study compared the HPC cluster of EC2 with five 
real clusters that exist in Lawrence Livermore National 
Laboratory (LLNL) for research purposes. Compute nodes in 
these clusters differ in their computing capabilities, memory 
size, network technology; network bandwidth and speed used 
in the interconnection between compute nodes. After executing 
many benchmarks on various types of clusters, EC2 did not 
perform superbly based on measuring the execution time 
compared with real clusters, but it had significantly minimum 
queuing times due to its elasticity. Therefore, the turnaround 
time is less in most benchmarks, except the communication 
intensive ones because EC2 has the 10/Gbps Ethernet speed 
versus InfiniBand network in real clusters [3].  
Evaluation done by [3] considered the tradeoff between 
performance and cost. They considered many factors while 
comparing different architecture such as: the applications 
themselves 
including 
computing 
and 
communication 
requirements of each, the resource utilization and the cost of 
executing tasks on the specific cluster. An important part of 
their work was developing a pricing model which was used to 
make a fair cost comparison when evaluating HPC 
applications. Work done in [12] focused on studying cloud 
bottlenecks that were evaluated by previous work done in [3] 
and [4]. These bottlenecks and challenges have the maximum 
effect in large and scalable applications; some of these 
challenges are the HPC network performance and the 
monitoring challenges. Authors of [12] try to overcome these 
challenges and recommended the best design practices to make 
efficient HPC networks. They discussed in details the network 
monitoring techniques that were proposed to improve existing 
methods, such as: the SNMP centralized methods, the scalable 
push-based approaches and data aggregation.  
2.3 HPC efficiency studies on real on-premises clusters 
and virtualized local clusters  
Work submitted in [1] surveyed many HPC architectures 
such as real HPC clusters, virtualized in-house HPC clusters 
using KVM, and then compared them with private and public 
cloud provides. The comparison considered many points of 
view to determine which architecture is the best for each type 
of applications as the authors in [4]. Authors defined the 
bottlenecks of each architecture after executing various types 
of benchmarks This work identified the main barriers that face 
HPC on the cloud, which directly affect the performance, such 
as: virtualization overhead, the choice of operating system 
effects and hypervisor visualization, storage and memory 
performance and the placement of the cluster virtual machines 
either in the same region or in different regions in many 
geographical places. The main conclusion which was an 
enhancement to the work done in [4], was that when we 
execute the same benchmarks on the same cloud architecture 
many times, there is a variation in the results due to the sharing 
of resources and network fluctuations. The work suggested 
many 
optimization 
techniques 
to 
reduce 
performance 
degradation in the cloud; such as: lightweight virtualization, 
using thin virtual machines with containers, and CPU affinity 
on the application level, and the hypervisor level to reduce the 
variation of execution time from run to run, answering two 
important questions: which application to migrate on cloud and 
which cloud architecture to migrate to.   
2.4 HPC efficiency studies on Windows Azure cloud  
Microsoft Windows Azure is a relatively new cloud 
provider. It provides both IaaS and PaaS. Azure became a 
leader in the market of cloud computing due to many integrated 
technical and industrial solutions that it offers to cloud 
customers. Meanwhile it takes its popularity from Microsoft’s 
reputation in the market. It’s a branded company that has 
customers trust all around the world over the past two-decades. 
Azure has many other benefits. It has more than thirty six 
regions scattered all around the world that has hundreds of data 
centers, to provide a high level of service to its customers. 
2.4.1 Comparing Windows Azure cloud with other cloud 
providers  
Work submitted in [8] and [9] studied three different 
cloud providers (Amazon EC2, Microsoft Azure and 
Rackspace), introducing very comprehensive details about 
virtual machines deployment details such as: setup procedures, 
hardware and software configurations, interconnection speeds, 
virtualization techniques used, booting time, deleting time, the 
ability of changing the VM size, supported operating systems 
etc. Beside many performance and cost analysis similar to that 
done in [1], [3] and [4], authors in [8] and [9] discuss briefly 
the history of the cloud providers. Amazon EC2 is more 
popular because it came before Microsoft Azure and 
introduced the IaaS offering while Microsoft Azure was 
delivering PaaS only at that time.  Authors evaluated the 
performance of Amazon EC2 clusters and Microsoft Azure 
clusters. Many benchmarks were tested with the result that 
indicated that Microsoft Azure HPC clusters are closest to real 
clusters than Amazon EC2 HPC clusters. This paper also 
introduced the difficulties that face porting existing work and 
compute instances to the Microsoft Azure cloud, explaining the 
migration process, the needed perquisites that should be 
satisfied before porting applications to Azure, and proving that 
these challenges do not affect the performance. Azure is still 
better than EC2 due to its better interconnections. 
2.4.2 Microsoft Azure Virtual machines performance   
Work submitted in [10] presented a comparative analysis 
of the compute instances performance on multiple cloud 
providers, studying the performance of single nodes, and the 
speedup of executing parallel and distributed tasks on a large 
number of nodes. High scalable benchmarks are used to 
evaluate the computation capabilities of different kinds of 
virtual machines on the cloud by estimating the performance 
per single core in each of them. This work examined all 
Microsoft Azure virtual machine specifications. Azure 
classifies the virtual machines into many categories called 
series; this work presented a clear comparison between Azure 
VMs [10]. 
2018 9th International Conference on Information and Communication Systems (ICICS)
183


III. 
THE TOP FOUR HPC CLOUD PROVIDERS 
In this paper, the top HPC solutions from the four 
leading cloud providers will be explained and then they will 
be compared with each other. Comparison criteria are selected 
according to the HPC user needs and expectations. This 
information was obtained from the official websites of each 
provider, and it is the most up-to-date information when this 
paper was submitted. Some features may have changed over 
time such as the number of regions, and other service may get 
available to users.   
Table 
1 
compares 
these 
providers 
from 
many 
perspectives. Some related to performance and some related to 
price. The following subsection discuss each provider in 
detail. 
 
 
Table 1 Amazon vs Azure vs Google vs Oracle 
 
Amazon EC2 and web services 
(AWS) [15] 
Microsoft Windows Azure 
platform [14] 
Google Cloud [17] 
Oracle Cloud [16] 
Starting Date 
2006 
2010 
2011 
2007 
Available 
Regions 
18 region 
36 region 
13 region, 11 additional new region 
in 2018 
12 region 
Virtual 
machines 
types 
• 
General purpose 
• 
Compute optimized 
• 
Memory optimized 
• 
Storage optimized 
• 
Accelerated computing 
• 
General purpose 
• 
Compute optimized 
• 
Memory optimized 
• 
Storage optimized 
• 
High performance 
compute 
• 
Standard machines 
• 
High-memory machines 
• 
High-CPU machines 
• 
Mega-memory machines 
• 
Bare Metal instances 
• 
Traditional virtual 
machines 
Batch 
Processing 
(if exist) 
Azure Batch 
AWS Batch 
N/A 
N/A 
SMB File 
Storage 
(if exist) 
Amazon Elastic File System 
Azure File Storage 
N/A 
N/A 
Migration 
Tools 
(if exist) 
Full Integrated package, AWS 
Snowball Edge  
Simple Import and export 
process 
N/A 
N/A 
Developer 
Tools 
(if exist) 
AWS SDK 
Azure SDK Visual Studio 
Integrated tools for Android, 
Powershell and  Eclipse 
N/A 
Management 
Tools 
(if exist) 
AWS Managed Services 
N/A 
N/A 
N/A 
Pricing 
methodology 
All cloud providers charge users for operating system images, except open source images such as Ubuntu Linux. In addition, static IP address 
assignment for virtual machines and VPN tunnels that are used to connect to virtual machines and between virtual machines is charged also. 
Pricing Policy 
• 
On-Demand 
instances, 
billing is based on computing 
capacity per hour (Pricing 
Calculator) 
• 
Spot instances billing is 
based on number of used 
VMs, price may fluctuate 
based on the demand inside 
requested zone. 
• 
Reserved instances up to 
75%) lower in price than the 
on-demand pricing. 
• 
Per-second instances, Price is 
nbased on  user usage per 
minutes and seconds. 
• 
All virtual machines are 
priced based on the 
usage of of resources per 
hour. 
• 
Not all VM are exist in 
all zones, this affect the 
price of VM’s in the 
nearby zones. 
• 
Resources in different 
zones vary in their price 
according to the size of 
the 
datacenter, 
its 
utilization, country tax 
and 
currencies 
differences. 
• 
All virtual machines are 
priced based on the usage of 
its resources per hour. 
• 
When 
using 
the 
custom 
virtual machines the price is 
flexibilty. Billing is based on 
the customer selected VM 
characterstices. 
• 
Pricing is based on 
the subtype of the 
virtual machine if it 
is a standard virtual 
machines or if it a 
Dense I/O virtual 
machines. 
• 
The 
Dense 
I/O 
virtual 
machines 
have double price 
than the standard 
virtual machines. 
Pricing 
Discount 
Based on the contract period, longer contract saves more money, also based on the payment option, for example, if it’s full upfront payment, 
more discount is obtained than the partial upfront. For example, Azure reduces resources billing if the user purchases them for one year 
commitment with up to 53% lower pricing and for three year commitment with up to 69% lower pricing. 
2018 9th International Conference on Information and Communication Systems (ICICS)
184


3.1 Amazon EC2 and Amazon Web Services (AWS)  
Amazon Web Services (AWS) was launched in 2003 as a 
retail company for computing infrastructure. But in 2006, 
Amazon expanded its work to provide a full, integrated 
package of online core services. Amazon is the pioneer of the 
cloud. Initially,, it delivered IaaS but now Amazon delivers 
PaaS offering also [15]. Nowadays, Amazon cloud consists of 
a set of services, providing virtual and cloud based 
computation, storage and other services [11]. Amazon EC2 
cloud enables users to create and manage compute instances in 
data centers using a simple web interface and productive tools 
and utilities [11]. EC2 provides locations for creating resources 
on it. Locations are regions and availability zones, which 
enable cloud users to replicate virtual machines in multiple 
locations for redundancy purposes. In general, regions hold one 
or more availability zones, which are geographically dispersed 
[6]. Amazon EC2, the oldest cloud provider, offers four ways 
of payment to the customer: On-Demand instances, Spot 
instances, reserved instances and dedicated instances. When 
using On-Demand instances, there are no long-term 
commitments or agreement. Customers can expand or shrink 
the compute capacity manually based on the expected 
application workload. This type is recommended for short-
term and unpredictable workloads. Amazon Spot instances 
allow the auto-scaling feature as spare computing capacity It 
can be used during peak hours. A pool of instances (virtual 
machines) are created and placed virtually in one Auto Scaling 
group. Customers can specify the minimum and the maximum 
number of instances in the group. Amazon recommends spot 
instances for urgent needs when some applications need more 
capacity and for applications with flexible beginning and 
ending times [15]. The third type of virtual machines offered 
by Amazon, are the Reserved Instances. Availability zones are 
created by customers to place the computing resources on it. 
Virtual machines inside the availability zone are reserved for 
the zone owner. This feature guarantees a certain level of 
confidence. These types of virtual machines are recommended 
for predictable usage. It can be used for applications that 
require steady-state computing behavior and high capacity. 
The last Amazon offering related to compute solutions is the 
Per Second Billing instances. These instances are used for 
applications testing, batch processing and data analytics [15].  
3.2 Microsoft Windows Azure Platform 
Microsoft Windows Azure platform was commercially 
available in 2010. It delivers more than six hundred Azure 
services. This wide variety of services can serve applications 
running on a wide range of systems, including: computation 
workloads, storage, mobile services, big data management, 
web development and machine learning [7]. Microsoft Azure 
was initiated for running applications on Windows virtual 
machines and storing the virtual machines data on the cloud 
[7]. Azure mainly consists of five components: Compute. 
Microsoft Azure provides Windows-based and Linux-based 
solutions that are used as a computing service. These virtual 
machines are used for many purposes such as: Desktop 
applications, simulations and HPC applications. Storage. 
Microsoft Azure provides many options for storing data; such 
as: blobs that store binary large objects, queues used for 
communication between many Azure applications, and also 
offers tables and files that store many type of files. Fabric 
controller. This component will be used to control more than 
one virtual machine that work together. The controller collects 
a large number of virtual machines into a single data center as a 
pool of resources. Other HPC Microsoft Azure components 
such as: compute and storage works on top of this pool of 
resources. Content delivery network (CDN). Windows Azure 
CDN uses many caching techniques to deal with storage 
accounts. Caching works well on the location of data to 
maintain it closer to the user. Connect. Windows Azure 
Connect service is used to interact with cloud applications; 
especially when there are on-premises components which are 
used beside cloud resources. Azure virtual machines allow 
users to deploy a wide range of computing solutions in an 
agile way. You can deploy virtually many compute solutions 
with many operating system options such as Windows, Linux, 
or a custom created operating system selected from Microsoft 
windows growing list of partners. Azure has many Virtual 
machines with different hardware and software configurations 
that fit all cloud user needs [7]. 
3.3 Google Cloud Platform  
Google basically offers the Google App Engine Platform 
as a full integrated service solution. Developers use it as a full 
package to write code, link code with services, SDK, 
development environments and other components, then 
hosting and running it as traditional web applications or 
mobile applications. All resources needed to give such a 
service are built and managed by Google cloud without 
engaging the developers in the underlying details of 
infrastructure [5]. Google App Engine is also available as a 
very high availability scalable solution on the cloud as a PaaS. 
This solution minimizes the management overhead caused by 
virtual machine utilization, especially during peak hours. This 
engine scales the number of virtual machines automatically to 
overcome the overload problem.  Google decided later to enter 
the market of IaaS, and gave cloud users many other solutions 
on its infrastructure. The Google Compute Engine allows users 
to have complete control on their virtual machines running on 
the cloud via direct access to the hardware [17]. Users are not 
restricted to use a single solution, they can mix options and 
choose the right solution for the right application and then 
connect component together. Users can use the App Engine 
solution for the front end layer that interacts with users, while 
using the Redis virtual machine in the Compute Engine [17]. 
Google Compute Engine's virtual machines are available in 
many different configurations that create custom virtual 
machine types which are optimized for specific needs. There 
are a wide variety of virtual machines configurations 
characterized by VM sizes. Google also offers flexible pricing 
options and discounts for long-term workloads to ensure 
sustainable business. All these features make the Compute 
Engine of Google the leader of the price/performance 
competition between the four previously mentioned cloud 
providers [17].  
2018 9th International Conference on Information and Communication Systems (ICICS)
185


There are many configurations from micro instances 
with one CPU to extra-large instances with 96 vCPUs and 
624GB of memory. Types are categorized between standard, 
high CPU and, high memory configurations. The other 
offering from Google is the Custom Virtual Machines, this 
type is tailored according to user needs to fit their application 
[17]. 
3.4 Oracle Cloud 
Oracle began to provide cloud services since 2007 as a 
database cloud services known as Database as a Service. Now, 
they entered the market of the cloud strongly by providing all 
other cloud offerings such as: IaaS, PaaS and SaaS at a lower 
competitive price. Oracle provides distinguishing Infrastructure 
as Service solutions: The Bare Metal Instances and the 
traditional Virtual machines instances. The Bare Metal 
instances are fully dedicated servers connected to each other 
using the software-defined network on the hypervisor operating 
system. Bare metal virtual machines offer unique raw 
performance. Each virtual machine has 36 processor cores with 
super SSDs that provide millions of IOPS. These virtual 
machines are ideal for HPC applications, input/output intensive 
applications such as big data workloads, and Oracle Database 
workloads [16].  
Oracle Virtual Machine instances are used for other 
workloads that does not require dedicated and High-
Performance virtual machines. These virtual machines are 
cloud-optimized, its hardware, storage, and networking 
infrastructure are accessible via predefined API’s. Oracle 
offers two options under the Compute category: Bare Metal 
Instances and Virtual machine instances. The Bare dedicated 
instances come with three types of virtual machines with 36 
vCPU with different memory sizes, Standard Compute 
Capacity virtual machine with 256GB memory, High I/O 
Compute Capacity virtual machine with 512GB memory and 
12.8TB SSD disk and the Dense I/O Compute Capacity with 
512GB and 28.8TB SSD disk [16]. The ordinary virtual 
machine 
instances 
have 
more 
CPU 
and 
memory 
configurations; from one CPU on the standard virtual 
machines to sixteen CPU for the DenseIO virtual machines. 
The DenseIO virtual machines have more memory than 
Standard; its memory reaches 240GB [16].  
IV. 
CONCULSION 
No cloud provider fit all user requirements. Each has its 
value proposition in the market. Some of the providers have a 
large market share due its seniority in the field such as 
Amazon EC2 cloud. Other providers have a good market share 
due to its reputation in the market. Microsoft Azure has its 
popularity from Microsoft reputation. Oracle already focuses 
their work on serving database and high I/O requirements. 
Google proposed new purchasing technique. Users can request 
any computing and storage requirement amount. In the 
information technology field, there are no clear predictions 
about what would happen in the next few years. All 
competitors invest millions of dollars to lead the market. They 
offer many services, many facilities to keep their old 
customers satisfied with their services and attract new 
customers to earn their loyalty.  
Our 
work 
continues 
to 
provide 
detailed 
recommendations 
and 
guidelines 
for 
users 
of 
HPC 
applications. Currently, comprehensive HPC experiments 
using benchmarks are being conducted on the Microsoft Azure 
platform. Machine learning techniques are being used to 
evaluate 
results 
and 
to 
help 
determine 
the 
best 
recommendations from the various offerings. This paper 
introduced our current extensive work in the HPC field. 
However, due to lack of space, we are unable to show full 
experiment results.  
REFERENCES 
[1] A.Gupta, “Techniques for Efficient High-Performance Computing in the 
Cloud”, University of Illinois, Urbana Champaign, 2014 
[2] A.Gupta, L.Kale and F.Gioachin, “The Who, What, Why and How of 
High-Performance Computing Application on the Cloud”, 2013. 
[3] A.Marathe, R.Harris, D.Lowenthal, B.Supinski, B.Rountree, M.Schulz. 
and  X.Yuan, “A Comparative Study of High-Performance Computing 
on the Cloud”, In the International Symposium on High-Performance 
Parallel and Distributed Computing, pp. 239-250, 2013. 
[4] A. Marathe, D. Lowenthal, B. Rountree, X. Yuan, M. Schulz and B. de 
Supinski, “A User Perspective of High-Performance Computing on the 
Cloud”, The University of Arizona, Lawrance Livermore National 
laboratory, March, 2012.  
[5] A.Zahariev, “Google App Engine”, Helsinki University of Technology, 
2009. 
[6] C.Vecchiola, S.Pandey and R.Buyya, “High-Performance Cloud 
Computing: A View of Scientific Applications”, 2009.   
[7] D. Chappel, “Introducing Windows Azure”, David Chappel and 
Associates, 2008 
[8] E.Roloff, F.Birck, M.Diener, A.Carissimi and P.Navaux, “Evaluating 
High-Performance Computing on the Windows Azure Platform”, In 
IEEE Fifth International Conference on Cloud Computing, pp. 803- 810, 
2012. 
[9] E.Roloff, M.Diener, A.Carissimi. and P.Navaux, “High-Performance 
Computing in the Cloud: Deployment, Performance and Cost 
Efficiency”, In 4th International Conference on Cloud Computing 
Technology and Science, pp. 371-378, 2012.  
[10] M.Mohammadi. and T.Bazhirov, “Comparative benchmarking of cloud 
computing 
vendors 
with 
High-Performance 
Linpack”, 
Cornell 
University library, February 2017. 
[11] Q.Zhang, L.Cheng and R.Boutaba, “Cloud computing: state-of-the-art 
and research challenges”, In Journal of Internet Services and 
Applications, pp. 7–18, 2010. 
[12] T.Groves, “Characterizing and Improving Power and Performance of 
HPC Networks”, University of New Mexico and Sandia National 
Laboratories, 2016. 
[13] V.Persico, P.Marchetta, A.Botta and A.Pescapè “On Network 
Throughput Variability in Microsoft Azure Cloud”, University of Naples 
Federico, Italy, 2016. 
[14] Portal.azure.com. (2017). Microsoft Azure. [online] Available at: 
https://portal.azure.com/ [Accessed 1 Dec. 2017]. 
[15] Amazon Web Services, Inc. (2017). Amazon Web Services 
(AWS), 
Cloud 
Computing 
Services. 
[online] 
Available 
at: 
https://aws.amazon.com/ [Accessed 1 Dec. 2017]. 
[16] Cloud.oracle.com. (2017). Enterprise Cloud Computing SaaS, PaaS, 
IaaS | Oracle Cloud. [online] Available at: https://cloud.oracle.com 
[Accessed 1 Dec. 2017]. 
[17] Google Cloud Platform. (2017). Google Cloud Computing, Hosting 
Services & APIs  |  Google Cloud Platform. [online] Available at: 
https://cloud.google.com 
[Accessed 
1 
Dec. 
2017]
 
 
2018 9th International Conference on Information and Communication Systems (ICICS)
186
