CLOUD COMPUTING
Principles and Paradigms
Edited by
Rajkumar Buyya
The University of Melbourne and Manjrasoft Pty Ltd., Australia
James Broberg
The University of Melbourne, Australia
Andrzej Goscinski
Deakin University, Australia
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>


CLOUD COMPUTING


CLOUD COMPUTING
Principles and Paradigms
Edited by
Rajkumar Buyya
The University of Melbourne and Manjrasoft Pty Ltd., Australia
James Broberg
The University of Melbourne, Australia
Andrzej Goscinski
Deakin University, Australia


Copyright r 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey
Published simultaneously in Canada
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise,
except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without
either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the
appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers,
MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 750-4470, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to
the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley &
Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at
http://www.wiley.com/go/permission.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best
efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the
accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and speciﬁcally disclaim any implied
warranties of merchantability or ﬁtness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or
extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained
herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where
appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of proﬁt or any
other commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other
damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact
our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United
States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print
may not be available in electronic formats. For more information about Wiley products, visit our
web site at www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Cloud computing : principles and paradigms / edited by Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg,
Andrzej Goscinski.
p.
; cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-470-88799-8 (hardback)
1. Cloud computing.
I. Buyya, Rajkumar, 1970
II. Broberg, James.
III. Goscinski,
Andrzej.
QA76.585.C58 2011
004.67u8—dc22
2010046367
Printed in the United States of America
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1


CONTENTS
PREFACE
XV
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
XIX
CONTRIBUTORS
XXI
PART I
FOUNDATIONS
1
1
Introduction to Cloud Computing
3
William Voorsluys, James Broberg, and Rajkumar Buyya
1.1
Cloud Computing in a Nutshell / 3
1.2
Roots of Cloud Computing / 5
1.3
Layers and Types of Clouds / 13
1.4
Desired Features of a Cloud / 16
1.5
Cloud Infrastructure Management / 17
1.6
Infrastructure as a Service Providers / 26
1.7
Platform as a Service Providers / 31
1.8
Challenges and Risks / 34
1.9
Summary / 37
References / 37
2
Migrating into a Cloud
43
T. S. Mohan
2.1
Introduction / 43
2.2
Broad Approaches to Migrating into the Cloud / 48
2.3
The Seven-Step Model of Migration into a Cloud / 51
2.4
Conclusions / 54
Acknowledgments / 55
References / 55
v


3
Enriching the ‘Integration as a Service’ Paradigm
for the Cloud Era
57
Pethuru Raj
3.1
An Introduction / 57
3.2
The Onset of Knowledge Era / 59
3.3
The Evolution of SaaS / 59
3.4
The Challenges of SaaS Paradigm / 61
3.5
Approaching the SaaS Integration Enigma / 63
3.6
New Integration Scenarios / 67
3.7
The Integration Methodologies / 69
3.8
SaaS Integration Products and Platforms / 72
3.9
SaaS Integration Services / 80
3.10 Businesses-to-Business Integration (B2Bi) Services / 84
3.11 A Framework of Sensor—Cloud Integration [3] / 89
3.12 SaaS Integration Appliances / 94
3.13 Conclusion / 95
References / 95
4
The Enterprise Cloud Computing Paradigm
97
Tariq Ellahi, Benoit Hudzia, Hui Li, Maik A. Lindner, and
Philip Robinson
4.1
Introduction / 97
4.2
Background / 98
4.3
Issues for Enterprise Applications on the Cloud / 103
4.4
Transition Challenges / 106
4.5
Enterprise Cloud Technology and Market Evolution / 108
4.6
Business Drivers Toward a Marketplace for Enterprise Cloud
Computing / 112
4.7
The Cloud Supply Chain / 115
4.8
Summary / 117
Acknowledgments / 117
References / 118
PART II
INFRASTRUCTURE AS A SERVICE (IAAS)
121
5
Virtual Machines Provisioning and Migration Services
123
Mohamed El-Refaey
5.1
Introduction and Inspiration / 123
vi
CONTENTS


5.2
Background and Related Work / 124
5.3
Virtual Machines Provisioning and Manageability / 130
5.4
Virtual Machine Migration Services / 132
5.5
VM Provisioning and Migration in Action / 136
5.6
Provisioning in the Cloud Context / 145
5.7
Future Research Directions / 151
5.8
Conclusion / 154
References / 154
6
On the Management of Virtual Machines for
Cloud Infrastructures
157
Ignacio M. Llorente, Rube´n S. Montero, Borja Sotomayor,
David Breitgand, Alessandro Maraschini, Eliezer Levy, and
Benny Rochwerger
6.1
The Anatomy of Cloud Infrastructures / 158
6.2
Distributed Management of Virtual Infrastructures / 161
6.3
Scheduling Techniques for Advance Reservation of Capacity / 166
6.4
Capacity Management to meet SLA Commitments / 172
6.5
Conclusions and Future Work / 185
Acknowledgments / 186
References / 187
7
Enhancing Cloud Computing Environments
Using a Cluster as a Service
193
Michael Brock and Andrzej Goscinski
7.1
Introduction / 193
7.2
Related Work / 194
7.3
RVWS Design / 197
7.4
Cluster as a Service: The Logical Design / 202
7.5
Proof of Concept / 212
7.6
Future Research Directions / 218
7.7
Conclusion / 219
References / 219
8
Secure Distributed Data Storage in Cloud Computing
221
Yu Chen, Wei-Shinn Ku, Jun Feng, Pu Liu, and Zhou Su
8.1
Introduction / 221
8.2
Cloud Storage: from LANs TO WANs / 222
8.3
Technologies for Data Security in Cloud Computing / 232
CONTENTS
vii


8.4
Open Questions and Challenges / 242
8.5
Summary / 246
References / 246
PART III
PLATFORM AND SOFTWARE
AS A SERVICE (PAAS/IAAS)
249
9
Aneka—Integration of Private and Public Clouds
251
Christian Vecchiola, Xingchen Chu, Michael Mattess, and
Rajkumar Buyya
9.1
Introduction / 251
9.2
Technologies and Tools for Cloud Computing / 254
9.3
Aneka Cloud Platform / 257
9.4
Aneka Resource Provisioning Service / 259
9.5
Hybrid Cloud Implementation / 262
9.6
Visionary thoughts for Practitioners / 269
9.7
Summary and Conclusions / 271
Acknowledgments / 272
References / 273
10
CometCloud: An Autonomic Cloud Engine
275
Hyunjoo Kim and Manish Parashar
10.1 Introduction / 275
10.2 CometCloud Architecture / 276
10.3 Autonomic Behavior of CometCloud / 280
10.4 Overview of CometCloud-based Applications / 286
10.5 Implementation and Evaluation / 287
10.6 Conclusion and Future Research Directions / 295
Acknowledgments / 295
References / 296
11
T-Systems’ Cloud-Based Solutions for
Business Applications
299
Michael Pauly
11.1 Introduction / 299
11.2 What Enterprises Demand of Cloud Computing / 300
11.3 Dynamic ICT Services / 302
11.4 Importance of Quality and Security in Clouds / 305
viii
CONTENTS


11.5 Dynamic Data Center—Producing Business-ready, Dynamic
ICT Services / 307
11.6 Case Studies / 314
11.7 Summary: Cloud Computing offers much more than Traditional
Outsourcing / 318
Acknowledgments / 319
References / 319
12
Workﬂow Engine for Clouds
321
Suraj Pandey, Dileban Karunamoorthy, and Rajkumar Buyya
12.1 Introduction / 321
12.2 Background / 322
12.3 Workﬂow Management Systems and Clouds / 323
12.4 Architecture of Workﬂow Management Systems / 326
12.5 Utilizing Clouds for Workﬂow Execution / 328
12.6 Case Study: Evolutionary Multiobjective Optimizations / 334
12.7 Visionary thoughts for Practitioners / 340
12.8 Future Research Directions / 341
12.9 Summary and Conclusions / 341
Acknowledgments / 342
References / 342
13
Understanding Scientiﬁc Applications for
Cloud Environments
345
Shantenu Jha, Daniel S. Katz, Andre Luckow,
Andre Merzky, and Katerina Stamou
13.1 Introduction / 345
13.2 A Classiﬁcation of Scientiﬁc Applications and Services in the
Cloud / 350
13.3 SAGA-based Scientiﬁc Applications that Utilize Clouds / 354
13.4 Discussion / 363
13.5 Conclusions / 367
References / 368
14
The MapReduce Programming Model and Implementations
373
Hai Jin, Shadi Ibrahim, Li Qi, Haijun Cao, Song Wu, and Xuanhua Shi
14.1 Introduction / 373
14.2 MapReduce Programming Model / 375
14.3 Major MapReduce Implementations for the Cloud / 379
CONTENTS
ix


14.4 MapReduce Impacts and Research Directions / 385
14.5 Conclusion / 387
Acknowledgments / 387
References / 387
PART IV
MONITORING AND MANAGEMENT
391
15
An Architecture for Federated Cloud Computing
393
Benny Rochwerger, Constantino Va´zquez, David Breitgand,
David Hadas, Massimo Villari, Philippe Massonet, Eliezer Levy,
Alex Galis, Ignacio M. Llorente, Rube´n S. Montero,
Yaron Wolfsthal, Kenneth Nagin, Lars Larsson, and Fermı´n Gala´n
15.1 Introduction / 393
15.2 A Typical Use Case / 394
15.3 The Basic Principles of Cloud Computing / 398
15.4 A Model for Federated Cloud Computing / 400
15.5 Security Considerations / 407
15.6 Summary and Conclusions / 410
Acknowledgments / 410
References / 410
16
SLA Management in Cloud Computing:
A Service Provider’s Perspective
413
Sumit Bose, Anjaneyulu Pasala, Dheepak R. A,
Sridhar Murthy and Ganesan Malaiyandisamy
16.1 Inspiration / 413
16.2 Traditional Approaches to SLO Management / 418
16.3 Types of SLA / 421
16.4 Life Cycle of SLA / 424
16.5 SLA Management in Cloud / 425
16.6 Automated Policy-based Management / 429
16.7 Conclusion / 435
References / 435
17
Performance Prediction for HPC on Clouds
437
Rocco Aversa, Beniamino Di Martino, Massimiliano Rak,
Salvatore Venticinque, and Umberto Villano
17.1 Introduction / 437
17.2 Background / 440
x
CONTENTS


17.3 Grid and Cloud / 442
17.4 HPC in the Cloud: Performance-related Issues / 445
17.5 Summary and Conclusions / 453
References / 454
PART V
APPLICATIONS
457
18
Best Practices in Architecting Cloud Applications
in the AWS Cloud
459
Jinesh Varia
18.1 Introduction / 459
18.2 Background / 459
18.3 Cloud Concepts / 463
18.4 Cloud Best Practices / 468
18.5 GrepTheWeb Case Study / 479
18.6 Future Research Directions / 486
18.7 Conclusion / 487
Acknowledgments / 487
References / 487
19
Massively Multiplayer Online Game Hosting on
Cloud Resources
491
Vlad Nae, Radu Prodan, and Alexandru Iosup
19.1 Introduction / 491
19.2 Background / 492
19.3 Related Work / 494
19.4 Model / 495
19.5 Experiments / 500
19.6 Future Research Directions / 507
19.7 Conclusions / 507
Acknowledgments / 507
References / 507
20
Building Content Delivery Networks Using Clouds
511
James Broberg
20.1 Introduction / 511
20.2 Background/Related Work / 512
CONTENTS
xi


20.3 MetaCDN: Harnessing Storage Clouds for Low-Cost,
High-Performance Content Delivery / 516
20.4 Performance of the MetaCDN Overlay / 525
20.5 Future Directions / 527
20.6 Conclusion / 528
Acknowledgments / 529
References / 529
21
Resource Cloud Mashups
533
Lutz Schubert, Matthias Assel, Alexander Kipp, and Stefan Wesner
21.1 Introduction / 533
21.2 Concepts of a Cloud Mashup / 536
21.3 Realizing Resource Mashups / 542
21.4 Conclusions / 545
References / 546
PART VI
GOVERNANCE AND CASE STUDIES
549
22
Organizational Readiness and Change Management
in the Cloud Age
551
Robert Lam
22.1 Introduction / 551
22.2 Basic Concept of Organizational Readiness / 552
22.3 Drivers for Changes: A Framework to Comprehend the
Competitive Environment / 555
22.4 Common Change Management Models / 559
22.5 Change Management Maturity Model (CMMM) / 563
22.6 Organizational Readiness Self-Assessment: (Who, When,
Where, and How) / 565
22.7 Discussion / 567
22.8 Conclusion / 570
Acknowledgments / 571
References / 572
23
Data Security in the Cloud
573
Susan Morrow
23.1 An Introduction to the Idea of Data Security / 573
23.2 The Current State of Data Security in the Cloud / 574
xii
CONTENTS


23.3 Homo Sapiens and Digital Information / 575
23.4 Cloud Computing and Data Security Risk / 576
23.5 Cloud Computing and Identity / 578
23.6 The Cloud, Digital Identity, and Data Security / 584
23.7 Content Level Security—Pros and Cons / 586
23.8 Future Research Directions / 588
23.9 Conclusion / 590
Acknowledgments / 591
Further Reading / 591
References / 591
24
Legal Issues in Cloud Computing
593
Janine Anthony Bowen
24.1 Introduction / 593
24.2 Data Privacy and Security Issues / 596
24.3 Cloud Contracting models / 601
24.4 Jurisdictional Issues Raised by Virtualization and
Data Location / 603
24.5 Commercial and Business Considerations—A Cloud
User’s Viewpoint / 606
24.6 Special Topics / 610
24.7 Conclusion / 611
24.8 Epilogue / 611
References / 612
25
Achieving Production Readiness for Cloud Services
615
Wai-Kit Cheah and Henry Kasim
25.1 Introduction / 615
25.2 Service Management / 615
25.3 ProducerConsumer Relationship / 616
25.4 Cloud Service Life Cycle / 620
25.5 Production Readiness / 626
25.6 Assessing Production Readiness / 626
25.7 Summary / 634
References / 634
Index
635
CONTENTS
xiii


PREFACE
Cloud computing has recently emerged as one of the buzzwords in the ICT
industry. Numerous IT vendors are promising to offer computation, storage,
and application hosting services and to provide coverage in several continents,
offering service-level agreements (SLA)-backed performance and uptime pro-
mises for their services. While these “clouds” are the natural evolution of
traditional data centers, they are distinguished by exposing resources (compu-
tation, data/storage, and applications) as standards-based Web services and
following a “utility” pricing model where customers are charged based on their
utilization of computational resources, storage, and transfer of data. They offer
subscription-based access to infrastructure, platforms, and applications that
are popularly referred to as IaaS (Infrastructure as a Service), PaaS (Platform
as a Service), and SaaS (Software as a Service). While these emerging services
have increased interoperability and usability and reduced the cost of computa-
tion, application hosting, and content storage and delivery by several orders of
magnitude, there is signiﬁcant complexity involved in ensuring that applica-
tions and services can scale as needed to achieve consistent and reliable
operation under peak loads.
Currently, expert developers are required to implement cloud services. Cloud
vendors, researchers, and practitioners alike are working to ensure that potential
users are educated about the beneﬁts of cloud computing and the best way to
harness the full potential of the cloud. However, being a new and popular
paradigm, the very deﬁnition of cloud computing depends on which computing
expert is asked. So, while the realization of true utility computing appears closer
than ever, its acceptance is currently restricted to cloud experts due to the
perceived complexities of interacting with cloud computing providers.
This book illuminates these issues by introducing the reader with the cloud
computing paradigm. The book provides case studies of numerous existing
compute, storage, and application cloud services and illustrates capabilities and
limitations of current providers of cloud computing services. This allows the
reader to understand the mechanisms needed to harness cloud computing in
their own respective endeavors. Finally, many open research problems that
have arisen from the rapid uptake of cloud computing are detailed. We hope
that this motivates the reader to address these in their own future research and
xv


development. We believe the book to serve as a reference for larger audience
such as systems architects, practitioners, developers, new researchers, and
graduate-level students. This book also comes with an associated Web site
(hosted at http://www.manjrasoft.com/CloudBook/) containing pointers to
advanced on-line resources.
ORGANIZATION OF THE BOOK
This book contains chapters authored by several leading experts in the ﬁeld of
cloud computing. The book is presented in a coordinated and integrated
manner starting with the fundamentals and followed by the technologies that
implement them.
The content of the book is organized into six parts:
I. Foundations
II. Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS )
III. Platform and Software as a Service (PaaS/SaaS)
IV. Monitoring and Management
V. Applications
VI. Governance and Case Studies
Part I presents fundamental concepts of cloud computing, charting their
evolution from mainframe, cluster, grid, and utility computing. Delivery
models such as Infrastructure as a Service, Platform as a Service, and Software
as a Service are detailed, as well as deployment models such as Public, Private,
and Hybrid Clouds. It also presents models for migrating applications to cloud
environments.
Part II covers Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), from enabling technologies
such as virtual machines and virtualized storage, to sophisticated mechanisms
for securely storing data in the cloud and managing virtual clusters.
Part III introduces Platform and Software as a Service (PaaS/IaaS), detailing
the delivery of cloud hosted software and applications. The design and
operation of sophisticated, auto-scaling applications and environments are
explored.
Part IV presents monitoring and management mechanisms for cloud
computing, which becomes critical as cloud environments become more
complex and interoperable. Architectures for federating cloud computing
resources are explored, as well as service level agreement (SLA) management
and performance prediction.
Part V details some novel applications that have been made possible by the
rapid emergence of cloud computing resources. Best practices for architecting
cloud applications are covered, describing how to harness the power of loosely
coupled cloud resources. The design and execution of applications that leverage
xvi
PREFACE


cloud resources such as massively multiplayer online game hosting, content
delivery and mashups are explored.
Part VI outlines the organizational, structural, regulatory and legal issues that
are commonly encountered in cloud computing environments. Details on how
companies can successfully prepare and transition to cloud environments are
explored, as well as achieving production readiness once such a transition is
completed. Data security and legal concerns are explored in detail, as users
reconcile moving their sensitive data and computation to cloud computing
providers.
Rajkumar Buyya
The University of Melbourne and Manjrasoft Pty Ltd., Australia
James Broberg
The University of Melbourne, Australia
Andrzej Goscinski
Deakin University, Australia
PREFACE
xvii


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
First and foremost, we are grateful to all the contributing authors for their
time, effort, and understanding during the preparation of the book.
We thank Professor Albert Zomaya, editor of the Wiley book series on
parallel and distributed computing, for his enthusiastic support and guidance
during the preparation of book and enabling us to easily navigate through
Wiley’s publication process.
We would like to thank members of the book Editorial Advisory Board
for their guidance during the preparation of the book. The board members are:
Dr. Geng Lin (CISCO Systems, USA), Prof. Manish Parashar (Rutgers: The
State University of New Jersey, USA), Dr. Wolfgang Gentzsch (Max-Planck-
Gesellschaft, Mu¨ nchen, Germany), Prof. Omer Rana (Cardiff University, UK),
Prof. Hai Jin (Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China), Dr.
Simon See (Sun Microsystems, Singapore), Dr. Greg Pﬁster (IBM, USA
(retired)), Prof. Ignacio M. Llorente (Universidad Complutense de Madrid,
Spain), Prof. Geoffrey Fox (Indiana University, USA), and Dr. Walfredo Cirne
(Google, USA).
All chapters were reviewed and authors have updated their chapters to
address review comments. We thank members of the Melbourne CLOUDS Lab
for their time and effort in peer reviewing of chapters.
Raj would like to thank his family members, especially Smrithi, Soumya, and
Radha Buyya, for their love, understanding, and support during the prepara-
tion of the book. James would like to thank his wife, Amy, for her love and
support. Andrzej would like to thank his wife, Teresa, for her love and support.
Finally, we would like to thank the staff at Wiley, particularly, Simone
Taylor (Senior Editor, Wiley), Michael Christian (Editorial Assistant, Wiley),
and S. Nalini (MPS Limited, a Macmillan Company, Chennai, India). They
were wonderful to work with!
R.B.
J.B.
A.G.
xix


CONTRIBUTORS
MATTHIAS ASSEL, High Performance Computing Center Stuttgart (HLRS),
University of Stuttgart, 70550 Stuttgart, Germany
ROCCO AVERSA, Department of Information Engineering, Second University of
Naples, 81031 Aversa (CE), Italy
SUMIT BOSE, Unisys Research Center, Bangalore, India - 560025
JANINE ANTHONY BOWEN, ESQ., McKenna Long & Aldridge LLP, Atlanta, GA
30308, USA
DAVID BREITGAND, IBM Haifa Research Lab, Haifa University Campus, 31095,
Haifa, Israel
JAMES BROBERG, Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering,
The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia
MICHAEL BROCK, School of Information Technology, Deakin University,
Geelong, Victoria 3217, Australia
RAJKUMAR BUYYA, Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering,
The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia
HAIJUN CAO, School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong Uni-
versity of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430074, China
WAI-KIT CHEAH, Advanced Customer Services, Oracle Corporation (S) Pte
Ltd., Singapore 038986
YU CHEN, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, State Uni-
versity of New York—Binghamton, Binghamton, NY 13902
XINGCHEN CHU, Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering,
The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia
BENIAMINO DI MARTINO, Department of Information Engineering, Second
University of Naples, 81031 Aversa (CE), Italy
xxi


TARIQ ELLAHI, SAP Research Belfast, BT3 9DT, Belfast, United Kingdom
MOHAMED A. EL-REFAEY, Arab Academy for Science, Technology and Maritime
Transport, College of Computing and Information Technology, Cairo, Egypt
JUN FENG, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, State Uni-
versity of New York—Binghamton, Binghamton, NY 13902
FERMI´ N GALA´ N, Telefo´ nica I þ D, Emilio Vargas, 6. 28043 Madrid, Spain
ALEX GALIS, University College London, Department of Electronic and
Electrical Engineering, Torrington Place, London WC1E 7JE, United
Kingdom
ANDRZEJ GOSCINSKI, School of Information Technology, Deakin University,
Geelong, Victoria 3217, Australia
DAVID HADAS, IBM Haifa Research Lab, Haifa University Campus, 31095,
Haifa, Israel
BENOIT HUDZIA, SAP Research Belfast, BT3 9DT, Belfast, United Kingdom
SHADI IBRAHIM, School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430074, China
ALEXANDRU IOSUP, Electrical Engineering, Mathematics and Computer Science
Department, Delft University of Technology, 2628 CD, Delft,
The Netherlands
SHANTENU JHA, Center for Computation and Technology and Department of
Computer Science, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803
HAI JIN, School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430074, China
DILEBAN KARUNAMOORTHY, Department of Computer Science and Software
Engineering, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Melbourne, VIC 3010,
Australia
HENRY KASIM, HPC and Cloud Computing Center, Oracle Corporation (S) Pte
Ltd, #18-01 Suntec Tower Four, Singapore 038986
DANIEL S. KATZ, Computation Institute, University of Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois 60637
HYUNJOO KIM, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Rutgers,
The State University of New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ
ALEXANDER KIPP, High Performance Computing Center Stuttgart (HLRS),
University of Stuttgart, 70550 Stuttgart, Germany
WEI-SHINN KU, Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering,
Auburn University, AL 36849
xxii
CONTRIBUTORS


ROBERT LAM, School of Information and Communication Technologies SAIT
Polytechnic, Calgary, Canada T2M 0L4
LARS LARSSON, Department of Computing Science, University Umea, Sweden
ELIEZER LEVY, SAP Research SRC Ra’anana, Ra’anana 43665; Israel
HUI LI, SAP Research Karlsruhe, Vincenz-Priessnitz-Strasse, 176131 Karls-
ruhe, Germany
MAIK A. LINDNER, SAP Research Belfast, BT3 9DT, Belfast, United Kingdom
PU LIU, IBM Endicott Center, New York, NY
IGNACIO M. LLORENTE, Distributed Systems Architecture Research Group,
Departmento de Arquitectura de Computadores y Automa´ tica, Facultad de
Informa´ tica, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, 28040 Madrid, Spain
ANDRE LUCKOW, Center for Computation and Technology, Louisiana State
University, Baton Rouge, LA, 70803
GANESAN MALAIYANDISAMY, SETLabs, Infosys Technologies Limited, Electro-
nics City, Bangalore, India, 560100
ALESSANDRO MARASCHINI, ElsagDatamat spa, Rome, Italy
PHILIPPE MASSONET, CETIC, B-6041 Charleroi, Belgium
MICHAEL MATTESS, Department of Computer Science and Software Engineer-
ing, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Melbourne, VIC 3010,
Australia
ANDRE MERZKY, Center for Computation and Technology, Louisiana State
University, Baton Rouge, LA, 70803
T. S. MOHAN, Infosys Technologies Limited, Electronics City, Bangalore,
India, 560100
RUBEN S. MONTERO, Distributed Systems Architecture Research Group,
Departmento de Arquitectura de Computadores, y Automa´ tica, Facultad de
Informatica, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, 28040 Madrid, Spain
SUSAN MORROW, Avoco Secure, London W1S 2LQ, United Kingdom
SRIDHAR MURTHY, Infosys Technologies Limited, Electronics City, Bangalore,
India, 560100
VLAD NAE, Institute of Computer Science, University of Innsbruck, Tech-
nikerstrabe 21a, A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria
KENNETH NAGIN, IBM Haifa Research Lab, Haifa University Campus, 31095,
Haifa, Israel
CONTRIBUTORS
xxiii
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>


SURAJ PANDEY, Department of Computer Science and Software Engineering,
The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Melbourne, VIC 3010, Australia
MANISH PARASHAR, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, New Jersey, USA.
ANJANEYULU PASALA, SETLabs, Infosys Technologies Limited, Electronics
City, Bangalore, India, 560100
MICHAEL PAULY, T-Systems, Aachen, Germany
RADU PRODAN, Institute of Computer Science, University of Innsbruck, A-6020
Innsbruck, Austria
LI QI, School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430074, China
DHEEPAK R A, SETLabs, Infosys Technologies Limited, Electronics City,
Bangalore, India, 560100
PETHURU RAJ, Robert Bosch India, Bangalore 560068, India
MASSIMILIANO RAK, Department of Information Engineering, Second University
of Naples, 81031 Aversa (CE), Italy
PHILIP ROBINSON, SAP Research Belfast, BT3 9DT, Belfast, United Kingdom
BENNY ROCHWERGER, IBM Haifa Research Lab, Haifa University Campus,
31095, Haifa, Israel
LUTZ SCHUBERT, High Performance Computing Center Stuttgart (HLRS),
University of Stuttgart, 70550 Stuttgart, Germany
XUANHUA SHI, School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430074, China
BORJA SOTOMAYOR, Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL
KATERINA STAMOU, Department of Computer Science, Louisiana State
University, Baton Rouge, LA, 70803
ZHOU SU, Department of Computer Science, Graduate School of Science and
Engineering, Waseda University, Japan
JINESH VARIA, Amazon Web Services, Seattle, WA 98109
CONSTANTINO VA´ ZQUEZ, Facultad de Informa´ tica, Universidad Complutense
de Madrid, 28040 Madrid, Spain
CHRISTIAN VECCHIOLA, Department of Computer Science and Software
Engineering, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Melbourne,
VIC 3010, Australia
xxiv
CONTRIBUTORS


SALVATORE VENTICINQUE, Department of Information Engineering, Second
University of Naples, 81031 Aversa (CE), Italy
UMBERTO VILLANO, Department of Engineering, University of Sannio, 82100
Benevento, Italy
MASSIMO VILLARI, Department. of Mathematics Faculty of Engineering,
University of Messina, 98166 Messina, Italy
WILLIAM VOORSLUYS, Department of Computer Science and Software
Engineering, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Melbourne,
VIC 3010, Australia
STEFAN WESNER, High Performance Computing Center Stuttgart (HLRS),
University of Stuttgart, 70550 Stuttgart, Germany
YARON WOLFSTHAL, IBM Haifa Research Lab, Haifa University Campus,
31095, Haifa, Israel
SONG WU, School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University
of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430074, China
CONTRIBUTORS
xxv


PART I
FOUNDATIONS


CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION TO CLOUD
COMPUTING
WILLIAM VOORSLUYS, JAMES BROBERG, and RAJKUMAR BUYYA
1.1
CLOUD COMPUTING IN A NUTSHELL
When plugging an electric appliance into an outlet, we care neither how electric
power is generated nor how it gets to that outlet. This is possible because
electricity is virtualized; that is, it is readily available from a wall socket that
hides power generation stations and a huge distribution grid. When extended to
information technologies, this concept means delivering useful functions while
hiding how their internals work. Computing itself, to be considered fully
virtualized, must allow computers to be built from distributed components such
as processing, storage, data, and software resources [1].
Technologies such as cluster, grid, and now, cloud computing, have all aimed
at allowing access to large amounts of computing power in a fully virtualized
manner, by aggregating resources and offering a single system view. In
addition, an important aim of these technologies has been delivering computing
as a utility. Utility computing describes a business model for on-demand
delivery of computing power; consumers pay providers based on usage (“pay-
as-you-go”), similar to the way in which we currently obtain services from
traditional public utility services such as water, electricity, gas, and telephony.
Cloud computing has been coined as an umbrella term to describe a category
of sophisticated on-demand computing services initially offered by commercial
providers, such as Amazon, Google, and Microsoft. It denotes a model on
which a computing infrastructure is viewed as a “cloud,” from which businesses
and individuals access applications from anywhere in the world on demand [2].
The main principle behind this model is offering computing, storage, and
software “as a service.”
Cloud Computing: Principles and Paradigms,
Edited by Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg and
Andrzej Goscinski
Copyright r 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
3


Many practitioners in the commercial and academic spheres have attempted
to deﬁne exactly what “cloud computing” is and what unique characteristics it
presents. Buyya et al. [2] have deﬁned it as follows: “Cloud is a parallel and
distributed computing system consisting of a collection of inter-connected
and virtualised computers that are dynamically provisioned and presented as one
or more uniﬁed computing resources based on service-level agreements (SLA)
established through negotiation between the service provider and consumers.”
Vaquero et al. [3] have stated “clouds are a large pool of easily usable and
accessible virtualized resources (such as hardware, development platforms
and/or services). These resources can be dynamically reconﬁgured to adjust
to a variable load (scale), allowing also for an optimum resource utilization.
This pool of resources is typically exploited by a pay-per-use model in which
guarantees are offered by the Infrastructure Provider by means of customized
Service Level Agreements.”
A recent McKinsey and Co. report [4] claims that “Clouds are hardware-
based services offering compute, network, and storage capacity where:
Hardware management is highly abstracted from the buyer, buyers incur
infrastructure costs as variable OPEX, and infrastructure capacity is highly
elastic.”
A report from the University of California Berkeley [5] summarized the key
characteristics of cloud computing as: “(1) the illusion of inﬁnite computing
resources; (2) the elimination of an up-front commitment by cloud users; and
(3) the ability to pay for use . . . as needed . . .”
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) [6] charac-
terizes cloud computing as “. . . a pay-per-use model for enabling available,
convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool of conﬁgurable
computing resources (e.g. networks, servers, storage, applications, services)
that can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal management effort
or service provider interaction.”
In a more generic deﬁnition, Armbrust et al. [5] deﬁne cloud as the “data
center hardware and software that provide services.” Similarly, Sotomayor
et al. [7] point out that “cloud” is more often used to refer to the IT
infrastructure deployed on an Infrastructure as a Service provider data center.
While there are countless other deﬁnitions, there seems to be common
characteristics between the most notable ones listed above, which a cloud
should have: (i) pay-per-use (no ongoing commitment, utility prices); (ii) elastic
capacity and the illusion of inﬁnite resources; (iii) self-service interface; and
(iv) resources that are abstracted or virtualised.
In addition to raw computing and storage, cloud computing providers
usually offer a broad range of software services. They also include APIs and
development tools that allow developers to build seamlessly scalable applica-
tions upon their services. The ultimate goal is allowing customers to run their
everyday IT infrastructure “in the cloud.”
A lot of hype has surrounded the cloud computing area in its infancy, often
considered the most signiﬁcant switch in the IT world since the advent of the
4
INTRODUCTION TO CLOUD COMPUTING


Internet [8]. In midst of such hype, a great deal of confusion arises when trying
to deﬁne what cloud computing is and which computing infrastructures can be
termed as “clouds.”
Indeed, the long-held dream of delivering computing as a utility has been
realized with the advent of cloud computing [5]. However, over the years,
several technologies have matured and signiﬁcantly contributed to make cloud
computing viable. In this direction, this introduction tracks the roots of
cloud computing by surveying the main technological advancements that
signiﬁcantly contributed to the advent of this emerging ﬁeld. It also explains
concepts and developments by categorizing and comparing the most relevant
R&D efforts in cloud computing, especially public clouds, management tools,
and development frameworks. The most signiﬁcant practical cloud computing
realizations are listed, with special focus on architectural aspects and innovative
technical features.
1.2
ROOTS OF CLOUD COMPUTING
We can track the roots of clouds computing by observing the advancement of
several technologies, especially in hardware (virtualization, multi-core chips),
Internet technologies (Web services, service-oriented architectures, Web 2.0),
distributed computing (clusters, grids), and systems management (autonomic
computing, data center automation). Figure 1.1 shows the convergence of
technology ﬁelds that signiﬁcantly advanced and contributed to the advent
of cloud computing.
Some of these technologies have been tagged as hype in their early stages
of development; however, they later received signiﬁcant attention from
academia and were sanctioned by major industry players. Consequently, a
speciﬁcation and standardization process followed, leading to maturity and
wide adoption. The emergence of cloud computing itself is closely linked to
the maturity of such technologies. We present a closer look at the technol-
ogies that form the base of cloud computing, with the aim of providing a
clearer picture of the cloud ecosystem as a whole.
1.2.1
From Mainframes to Clouds
We are currently experiencing a switch in the IT world, from in-house
generated computing power into utility-supplied computing resources delivered
over the Internet as Web services. This trend is similar to what occurred about a
century ago when factories, which used to generate their own electric power,
realized that it is was cheaper just plugging their machines into the newly
formed electric power grid [8].
Computing delivered as a utility can be deﬁned as “on demand delivery of
infrastructure, applications, and business processes in a security-rich, shared,
scalable, and based computer environment over the Internet for a fee” [9].
1.2
ROOTS OF CLOUD COMPUTING
5


This model brings beneﬁts to both consumers and providers of IT services.
Consumers can attain reduction on IT-related costs by choosing to obtain
cheaper services from external providers as opposed to heavily investing on IT
infrastructure and personnel hiring. The “on-demand” component of this
model allows consumers to adapt their IT usage to rapidly increasing or
unpredictable computing needs.
Providers of IT services achieve better operational costs; hardware and
software infrastructures are built to provide multiple solutions and serve many
users, thus increasing efﬁciency and ultimately leading to faster return on
investment (ROI) as well as lower total cost of ownership (TCO) [10].
Several technologies have in some way aimed at turning the utility comput-
ing concept into reality. In the 1970s, companies who offered common data
processing tasks, such as payroll automation, operated time-shared mainframes
as utilities, which could serve dozens of applications and often operated close
to 100% of their capacity. In fact, mainframes had to operate at very high
utilization rates simply because they were very expensive and costs should be
justiﬁed by efﬁcient usage [8].
The mainframe era collapsed with the advent of fast and inexpensive
microprocessors and IT data centers moved to collections of commodity
servers. Apart from its clear advantages, this new model inevitably led to
isolation of workload into dedicated servers, mainly due to incompatibilities
Autonomic Computing
Data Center Automation
Hardware Virtualization
Multi-core chips
SOA
Web 2.0
Web Services
Mashups
Utility &
Grid
Computing
 
Cloud
Computing
 
Hardware
Systems Management
Distributed Computing
Internet Technologies
FIGURE 1.1. Convergence of various advances leading to the advent of cloud
computing.
6
INTRODUCTION TO CLOUD COMPUTING


between software stacks and operating systems [11]. In addition, the unavail-
ability of efﬁcient computer networks meant that IT infrastructure should be
hosted in proximity to where it would be consumed. Altogether, these facts
have prevented the utility computing reality of taking place on modern
computer systems.
Similar to old electricity generation stations, which used to power individual
factories, computing servers and desktop computers in a modern organization
are often underutilized, since IT infrastructure is conﬁgured to handle theore-
tical demand peaks. In addition, in the early stages of electricity generation,
electric current could not travel long distances without signiﬁcant voltage
losses. However, new paradigms emerged culminating on transmission systems
able to make electricity available hundreds of kilometers far off from where it is
generated. Likewise, the advent of increasingly fast ﬁber-optics networks has
relit the ﬁre, and new technologies for enabling sharing of computing power
over great distances have appeared.
These facts reveal the potential of delivering computing services with
the speed and reliability that businesses enjoy with their local machines. The
beneﬁts of economies of scale and high utilization allow providers to offer
computing services for a fraction of what it costs for a typical company that
generates its own computing power [8].
1.2.2
SOA, Web Services, Web 2.0, and Mashups
The emergence of Web services (WS) open standards has signiﬁcantly con-
tributed to advances in the domain of software integration [12]. Web services
can glue together applications running on different messaging product plat-
forms, enabling information from one application to be made available to
others, and enabling internal applications to be made available over the
Internet.
Over the years a rich WS software stack has been speciﬁed and standardized,
resulting in a multitude of technologies to describe, compose, and orchestrate
services, package and transport messages between services, publish and dis-
cover services, represent quality of service (QoS) parameters, and ensure
security in service access [13].
WS standards have been created on top of existing ubiquitous technologies
such as HTTP and XML, thus providing a common mechanism for delivering
services, making them ideal for implementing a service-oriented architecture
(SOA). The purpose of a SOA is to address requirements of loosely coupled,
standards-based, and protocol-independent distributed computing. In a SOA,
software resources are packaged as “services,” which are well-deﬁned, self-
contained modules that provide standard business functionality and are
independent of the state or context of other services. Services are described
in a standard deﬁnition language and have a published interface [12].
The maturity of WS has enabled the creation of powerful services that can be
accessed on-demand, in a uniform way. While some WS are published with the
1.2
ROOTS OF CLOUD COMPUTING
7


intent of serving end-user applications, their true power resides in its interface
being accessible by other services. An enterprise application that follows the
SOA paradigm is a collection of services that together perform complex
business logic [12].
This concept of gluing services initially focused on the enterprise Web, but
gained space in the consumer realm as well, especially with the advent of Web
2.0. In the consumer Web, information and services may be programmatically
aggregated, acting as building blocks of complex compositions, called service
mashups. Many service providers, such as Amazon, del.icio.us, Facebook, and
Google, make their service APIs publicly accessible using standard protocols
such as SOAP and REST [14]. Consequently, one can put an idea of a fully
functional Web application into practice just by gluing pieces with few lines
of code.
In the Software as a Service (SaaS) domain, cloud applications can be built
as compositions of other services from the same or different providers. Services
such user authentication, e-mail, payroll management, and calendars are
examples of building blocks that can be reused and combined in a business
solution in case a single, ready-made system does not provide all those features.
Many building blocks and solutions are now available in public marketplaces.
For example, Programmable Web1 is a public repository of service APIs and
mashups currently listing thousands of APIs and mashups. Popular APIs such
as Google Maps, Flickr, YouTube, Amazon eCommerce, and Twitter, when
combined, produce a variety of interesting solutions, from ﬁnding video game
retailers to weather maps. Similarly, Salesforce.com’s offers AppExchange,2
which enables the sharing of solutions developed by third-party developers on
top of Salesforce.com components.
1.2.3
Grid Computing
Grid computing enables aggregation of distributed resources and transparently
access to them. Most production grids such as TeraGrid [15] and EGEE [16]
seek to share compute and storage resources distributed across different
administrative domains, with their main focus being speeding up a broad
range of scientiﬁc applications, such as climate modeling, drug design, and
protein analysis.
A key aspect of the grid vision realization has been building standard Web
services-based protocols that allow distributed resources to be “discovered,
accessed, allocated, monitored, accounted for, and billed for, etc., and in
general managed as a single virtual system.” The Open Grid Services Archi-
tecture (OGSA) addresses this need for standardization by deﬁning a set of core
capabilities and behaviors that address key concerns in grid systems.
1 http://www.programmableweb.com
2 http://sites.force.com/appexchange
8
INTRODUCTION TO CLOUD COMPUTING


Globus Toolkit [18] is a middleware that implements several standard Grid
services and over the years has aided the deployment of several service-oriented
Grid infrastructures and applications. An ecosystem of tools is available to
interact with service grids, including grid brokers, which facilitate user inter-
action with multiple middleware and implement policies to meet QoS needs.
The development of standardized protocols for several grid computing
activities has contributed—theoretically—to allow delivery of on-demand
computing services over the Internet. However, ensuring QoS in grids has
been perceived as a difﬁcult endeavor [19]. Lack of performance isolation
has prevented grids adoption in a variety of scenarios, especially on environ-
ments where resources are oversubscribed or users are uncooperative. Activities
associated with one user or virtual organization (VO) can inﬂuence, in an
uncontrollable way, the performance perceived by other users using the same
platform. Therefore, the impossibility of enforcing QoS and guaranteeing
execution time became a problem, especially for time-critical applications [20].
Another issue that has lead to frustration when using grids is the availability
of resources with diverse software conﬁgurations, including disparate operating
systems, libraries, compilers, runtime environments, and so forth. At the same
time, user applications would often run only on specially customized environ-
ments. Consequently, a portability barrier has often been present on most
grid infrastructures, inhibiting users of adopting grids as utility computing
environments [20].
Virtualization technology has been identiﬁed as the perfect ﬁt to issues that
have caused frustration when using grids, such as hosting many dissimilar
software applications on a single physical platform. In this direction, some
research projects (e.g., Globus Virtual Workspaces [20]) aimed at evolving grids
to support an additional layer to virtualize computation, storage, and network
resources.
1.2.4
Utility Computing
With increasing popularity and usage, large grid installations have faced new
problems, such as excessive spikes in demand for resources coupled with
strategic and adversarial behavior by users. Initially, grid resource management
techniques did not ensure fair and equitable access to resources in many
systems. Traditional metrics (throughput, waiting time, and slowdown) failed
to capture the more subtle requirements of users. There were no real incentives
for users to be ﬂexible about resource requirements or job deadlines, nor
provisions to accommodate users with urgent work.
In utility computing environments, users assign a “utility” value to their
jobs, where utility is a ﬁxed or time-varying valuation that captures various
QoS constraints (deadline, importance, satisfaction). The valuation is the
amount they are willing to pay a service provider to satisfy their demands.
The service providers then attempt to maximize their own utility, where said
utility may directly correlate with their proﬁt. Providers can choose to prioritize
1.2
ROOTS OF CLOUD COMPUTING
9


high yield (i.e., proﬁt per unit of resource) user jobs, leading to a scenario where
shared systems are viewed as a marketplace, where users compete for resources
based on the perceived utility or value of their jobs. Further information and
comparison of these utility computing environments are available in an
extensive survey of these platforms [17].
1.2.5
Hardware Virtualization
Cloud computing services are usually backed by large-scale data centers
composed of thousands of computers. Such data centers are built to serve
many users and host many disparate applications. For this purpose, hardware
virtualization can be considered as a perfect ﬁt to overcome most operational
issues of data center building and maintenance.
The idea of virtualizing a computer system’s resources, including processors,
memory, and I/O devices, has been well established for decades, aiming at
improving sharing and utilization of computer systems [21]. Hardware virtua-
lization allows running multiple operating systems and software stacks on a
single physical platform. As depicted in Figure 1.2, a software layer, the virtual
machine monitor (VMM), also called a hypervisor, mediates access to the
physical hardware presenting to each guest operating system a virtual machine
(VM), which is a set of virtual platform interfaces [22].
The advent of several innovative technologies—multi-core chips, paravir-
tualization, hardware-assisted virtualization, and live migration of VMs—has
contributed to an increasing adoption of virtualization on server systems.
Traditionally, perceived beneﬁts were improvements on sharing and utilization,
better manageability, and higher reliability. More recently, with the adoption of
virtualization on a broad range of server and client systems, researchers and
practitioners
have
been
emphasizing
three
basic
capabilities
regarding
Hardware
Virtual Machine Monitor (Hypervisor)
Virtual Machine N
Guest OS
App A
App B
App X
App Y
Virtual Machine 1
User software
Email Server
Data
base
Web
Server
Virtual Machine 2
Facebook App
Java
Ruby on
Rails
Linux
User software
User software
FIGURE 1.2. A hardware virtualized server hosting three virtual machines, each one
running distinct operating system and user level software stack.
10
INTRODUCTION TO CLOUD COMPUTING


management of workload in a virtualized system, namely isolation, consolida-
tion, and migration [23].
Workload isolation is achieved since all program instructions are fully
conﬁned inside a VM, which leads to improvements in security. Better
reliability is also achieved because software failures inside one VM do not
affect others [22]. Moreover, better performance control is attained since
execution of one VM should not affect the performance of another VM [23].
The consolidation of several individual and heterogeneous workloads onto a
single physical platform leads to better system utilization. This practice is also
employed for overcoming potential software and hardware incompatibilities in
case of upgrades, given that it is possible to run legacy and new operation
systems concurrently [22].
Workload migration, also referred to as application mobility [23], targets at
facilitating hardware maintenance, load balancing, and disaster recovery. It is
done by encapsulating a guest OS state within a VM and allowing it to be
suspended, fully serialized, migrated to a different platform, and resumed
immediately or preserved to be restored at a later date [22]. A VM’s state
includes a full disk or partition image, conﬁguration ﬁles, and an image of its
RAM [20].
A number of VMM platforms exist that are the basis of many utility or
cloud computing environments. The most notable ones, VMWare, Xen, and
KVM, are outlined in the following sections.
VMWare ESXi. VMware is a pioneer in the virtualization market. Its ecosys-
tem of tools ranges from server and desktop virtualization to high-level
management tools [24]. ESXi is a VMM from VMWare. It is a bare-metal
hypervisor, meaning that it installs directly on the physical server, whereas
others may require a host operating system. It provides advanced virtualization
techniques of processor, memory, and I/O. Especially, through memory
ballooning and page sharing, it can overcommit memory, thus increasing the
density of VMs inside a single physical server.
Xen. The Xen hypervisor started as an open-source project and has served as a
base to other virtualization products, both commercial and open-source. It has
pioneered the para-virtualization concept, on which the guest operating system,
by means of a specialized kernel, can interact with the hypervisor, thus
signiﬁcantly improving performance. In addition to an open-source distribu-
tion [25], Xen currently forms the base of commercial hypervisors of a number
of vendors, most notably Citrix XenServer [26] and Oracle VM [27].
KVM. The kernel-based virtual machine (KVM) is a Linux virtualization
subsystem. Is has been part of the mainline Linux kernel since version 2.6.20,
thus being natively supported by several distributions. In addition, activities
such as memory management and scheduling are carried out by existing kernel
1.2
ROOTS OF CLOUD COMPUTING
11


features, thus making KVM simpler and smaller than hypervisors that take
control of the entire machine [28].
KVM leverages hardware-assisted virtualization, which improves perfor-
mance and allows it to support unmodiﬁed guest operating systems [29];
currently, it supports several versions of Windows, Linux, and UNIX [28].
1.2.6
Virtual Appliances and the Open Virtualization Format
An application combined with the environment needed to run it (operating
system, libraries, compilers, databases, application containers, and so forth) is
referred to as a “virtual appliance.” Packaging application environments in the
shape of virtual appliances eases software customization, conﬁguration, and
patching and improves portability. Most commonly, an appliance is shaped as
a VM disk image associated with hardware requirements, and it can be readily
deployed in a hypervisor.
On-line marketplaces have been set up to allow the exchange of ready-made
appliances containing popular operating systems and useful software combina-
tions, both commercial and open-source. Most notably, the VMWare virtual
appliance marketplace allows users to deploy appliances on VMWare hypervi-
sors or on partners public clouds [30], and Amazon allows developers to share
specialized Amazon Machine Images (AMI) and monetize their usage on
Amazon EC2 [31].
In a multitude of hypervisors, where each one supports a different VM image
format and the formats are incompatible with one another, a great deal of
interoperability issues arises. For instance, Amazon has its Amazon machine
image (AMI) format, made popular on the Amazon EC2 public cloud. Other
formats are used by Citrix XenServer, several Linux distributions that ship with
KVM, Microsoft Hyper-V, and VMware ESX.
In order to facilitate packing and distribution of software to be run on VMs
several vendors, including VMware, IBM, Citrix, Cisco, Microsoft, Dell, and
HP, have devised the Open Virtualization Format (OVF). It aims at being
“open, secure, portable, efﬁcient and extensible” [32]. An OVF package consists
of a ﬁle, or set of ﬁles, describing the VM hardware characteristics (e.g.,
memory, network cards, and disks), operating system details, startup, and
shutdown actions, the virtual disks themselves, and other metadata containing
product and licensing information. OVF also supports complex packages
composed of multiple VMs (e.g., multi-tier applications) [32].
OVF’s extensibility has encouraged additions relevant to management of
data centers and clouds. Mathews et al. [33] have devised virtual machine
contracts (VMC) as an extension to OVF. A VMC aids in communicating and
managing the complex expectations that VMs have of their runtime environ-
ment and vice versa. A simple example of a VMC is when a cloud consumer
wants to specify minimum and maximum amounts of a resource that a VM
needs to function; similarly the cloud provider could express resource limits as a
way to bound resource consumption and costs.
12
INTRODUCTION TO CLOUD COMPUTING


1.2.7
Autonomic Computing
The increasing complexity of computing systems has motivated research on
autonomic computing, which seeks to improve systems by decreasing human
involvement in their operation. In other words, systems should manage
themselves, with high-level guidance from humans [34].
Autonomic, or self-managing, systems rely on monitoring probes and
gauges (sensors), on an adaptation engine (autonomic manager) for computing
optimizations based on monitoring data, and on effectors to carry out changes
on the system. IBM’s Autonomic Computing Initiative has contributed to
deﬁne the four properties of autonomic systems: self-conﬁguration, self-
optimization, self-healing, and self-protection. IBM has also suggested a
reference model for autonomic control loops of autonomic managers, called
MAPE-K (Monitor Analyze Plan Execute—Knowledge) [34, 35].
The large data centers of cloud computing providers must be managed in an
efﬁcient way. In this sense, the concepts of autonomic computing inspire
software technologies for data center automation, which may perform tasks
such as: management of service levels of running applications; management of
data center capacity; proactive disaster recovery; and automation of VM
provisioning [36].
1.3
LAYERS AND TYPES OF CLOUDS
Cloud computing services are divided into three classes, according to the
abstraction level of the capability provided and the service model of providers,
namely: (1) Infrastructure as a Service, (2) Platform as a Service, and (3) Software
as a Service [6]. Figure 1.3 depicts the layered organization of the cloud stack
from physical infrastructure to applications.
These abstraction levels can also be viewed as a layered architecture where
services of a higher layer can be composed from services of the underlying layer
[37]. The reference model of Buyya et al. [38] explains the role of each layer in
an integrated architecture. A core middleware manages physical resources and
the VMs deployed on top of them; in addition, it provides the required features
(e.g., accounting and billing) to offer multi-tenant pay-as-you-go services.
Cloud development environments are built on top of infrastructure services
to offer application development and deployment capabilities; in this level,
various programming models, libraries, APIs, and mashup editors enable the
creation of a range of business, Web, and scientiﬁc applications. Once deployed
in the cloud, these applications can be consumed by end users.
1.3.1
Infrastructure as a Service
Offering virtualized resources (computation, storage, and communication) on
demand is known as Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) [7]. A cloud infrastructure
1.3
LAYERS AND TYPES OF CLOUDS
13


enables on-demand provisioning of servers running several choices of operating
systems and a customized software stack. Infrastructure services are considered
to be the bottom layer of cloud computing systems [39].
Amazon Web Services mainly offers IaaS, which in the case of its EC2
service means offering VMs with a software stack that can be customized
similar to how an ordinary physical server would be customized. Users are
given privileges to perform numerous activities to the server, such as: starting
and stopping it, customizing it by installing software packages, attaching
virtual disks to it, and conﬁguring access permissions and ﬁrewalls rules.
1.3.2
Platform as a Service
In addition to infrastructure-oriented clouds that provide raw computing and
storage services, another approach is to offer a higher level of abstraction to
make a cloud easily programmable, known as Platform as a Service (PaaS). A
cloud platform offers an environment on which developers create and deploy
applications and do not necessarily need to know how many processors or how
much memory that applications will be using. In addition, multiple program-
ming models and specialized services (e.g., data access, authentication, and
payments) are offered as building blocks to new applications [40].
Google AppEngine, an example of Platform as a Service, offers a scalable
environment for developing and hosting Web applications, which should
be written in speciﬁc programming languages such as Python or Java, and use
the services’ own proprietary structured object data store. Building blocks
17
Cloud Applications
Social networks, Office suites, CRM,
Video processing 
SaaS
Cloud Platform
Programming languages, Frameworks,
Mashups editors, Structured data
PaaS
Cloud Infrastructure
Compute Servers, Data Storage,
Firewall, Load Balancer
IaaS
Web Browser
Cloud
Development
Environment
Virtual
Infrastructure
Manager
Service 
Class
Main Access &
Management Tool
Service content
FIGURE 1.3. The cloud computing stack.
14
INTRODUCTION TO CLOUD COMPUTING


include an in-memory object cache (memcache), mail service, instant messaging
service (XMPP), an image manipulation service, and integration with Google
Accounts authentication service.
1.3.3
Software as a Service
Applications reside on the top of the cloud stack. Services provided by this
layer can be accessed by end users through Web portals. Therefore, consumers
are increasingly shifting from locally installed computer programs to on-line
software services that offer the same functionally. Traditional desktop applica-
tions such as word processing and spreadsheet can now be accessed as a service
in the Web. This model of delivering applications, known as Software as a
Service (SaaS), alleviates the burden of software maintenance for customers
and simpliﬁes development and testing for providers [37, 41].
Salesforce.com, which relies on the SaaS model, offers business productivity
applications (CRM) that reside completely on their servers, allowing costumers
to customize and access applications on demand.
1.3.4
Deployment Models
Although cloud computing has emerged mainly from the appearance of public
computing utilities, other deployment models, with variations in physical
location and distribution, have been adopted. In this sense, regardless of its
service class, a cloud can be classiﬁed as public, private, community, or hybrid [6]
based on model of deployment as shown in Figure 1.4.
Private/Enterprise
Clouds
Cloud computing
model run
within a company’s
own Data Center/
infrastructure for
internal and/or
partners use.
Public/Internet
Clouds
3rd party,
multi-tenant Cloud
infrastructure
& services:
* available on
subscription basis
(pay as you go)
Hybrid/Mixed Clouds
Mixed usage of
private and public
Clouds:
Leasing public
cloud services
when private cloud
capacity is
insufficient
FIGURE 1.4. Types of clouds based on deployment models.
1.3
LAYERS AND TYPES OF CLOUDS
15


Armbrust et al. [5] propose deﬁnitions for public cloud as a “cloud made
available in a pay-as-you-go manner to the general public” and private cloud as
“internal data center of a business or other organization, not made available to
the general public.”
In most cases, establishing a private cloud means restructuring an existing
infrastructure by adding virtualization and cloud-like interfaces. This allows
users to interact with the local data center while experiencing the same
advantages of public clouds, most notably self-service interface, privileged
access to virtual servers, and per-usage metering and billing.
A community cloud is “shared by several organizations and supports a
speciﬁc community that has shared concerns (e.g., mission, security require-
ments, policy, and compliance considerations) [6].”
A hybrid cloud takes shape when a private cloud is supplemented with
computing capacity from public clouds [7]. The approach of temporarily
renting capacity to handle spikes in load is known as “cloud-bursting” [42].
1.4
DESIRED FEATURES OF A CLOUD
Certain features of a cloud are essential to enable services that truly represent
the cloud computing model and satisfy expectations of consumers, and cloud
offerings must be (i) self-service, (ii) per-usage metered and billed, (iii) elastic,
and (iv) customizable.
1.4.1
Self-Service
Consumers of cloud computing services expect on-demand, nearly instant
access to resources. To support this expectation, clouds must allow self-service
access so that customers can request, customize, pay, and use services without
intervention of human operators [6].
1.4.2
Per-Usage Metering and Billing
Cloud computing eliminates up-front commitment by users, allowing them to
request and use only the necessary amount. Services must be priced on a short-
term basis (e.g., by the hour), allowing users to release (and not pay for)
resources as soon as they are not needed [5]. For these reasons, clouds must
implement features to allow efﬁcient trading of service such as pricing,
accounting, and billing [2]. Metering should be done accordingly for different
types of service (e.g., storage, processing, and bandwidth) and usage promptly
reported, thus providing greater transparency [6].
1.4.3
Elasticity
Cloud computing gives the illusion of inﬁnite computing resources available on
demand [5]. Therefore users expect clouds to rapidly provide resources in any
16
INTRODUCTION TO CLOUD COMPUTING


quantity at any time. In particular, it is expected that the additional resources
can be (a) provisioned, possibly automatically, when an application load
increases and (b) released when load decreases (scale up and down) [6].
1.4.4
Customization
In a multi-tenant cloud a great disparity between user needs is often the case.
Thus, resources rented from the cloud must be highly customizable. In the case
of infrastructure services, customization means allowing users to deploy
specialized virtual appliances and to be given privileged (root) access to the
virtual servers. Other service classes (PaaS and SaaS) offer less ﬂexibility and
are not suitable for general-purpose computing [5], but still are expected to
provide a certain level of customization.
1.5
CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURE MANAGEMENT
A key challenge IaaS providers face when building a cloud infrastructure is
managing physical and virtual resources, namely servers, storage, and net-
works, in a holistic fashion [43]. The orchestration of resources must be
performed in a way to rapidly and dynamically provision resources to
applications [7].
The software toolkit responsible for this orchestration is called a virtual
infrastructure manager (VIM) [7]. This type of software resembles a traditional
operating system—but instead of dealing with a single computer, it aggregates
resources from multiple computers, presenting a uniform view to user and
applications. The term “cloud operating system” is also used to refer to it [43].
Other terms include “infrastructure sharing software [44]” and “virtual infra-
structure engine [45].”
Sotomayor et al. [7], in their description of the cloud ecosystem of software
tools, propose a differentiation between two categories of tools used to manage
clouds. The ﬁrst category—cloud toolkits—includes those that “expose a
remote and secure interface for creating, controlling and monitoring virtualize
resources,” but do not specialize in VI management. Tools in the second
category—the virtual infrastructure managers—provide advanced features
such as automatic load balancing and server consolidation, but do not expose
remote cloud-like interfaces. However, the authors point out that there is a
superposition between the categories; cloud toolkits can also manage virtual
infrastructures, although they usually provide less sophisticated features than
specialized VI managers do.
The availability of a remote cloud-like interface and the ability of managing
many users and their permissions are the primary features that would
distinguish “cloud toolkits” from “VIMs.” However, in this chapter, we place
both categories of tools under the same group (of the VIMs) and, when
applicable, we highlight the availability of a remote interface as a feature.
1.5
CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURE MANAGEMENT
17


Virtually all VIMs we investigated present a set of basic features related to
managing the life cycle of VMs, including networking groups of VMs together
and setting up virtual disks for VMs. These basic features pretty much deﬁne
whether a tool can be used in practical cloud deployments or not. On the other
hand, only a handful of software present advanced features (e.g., high
availability) which allow them to be used in large-scale production clouds.
1.5.1
Features
We now present a list of both basic and advanced features that are usually
available in VIMs.
Virtualization Support. The multi-tenancy aspect of clouds requires multiple
customers with disparate requirements to be served by a single hardware
infrastructure. Virtualized resources (CPUs, memory, etc.) can be sized and
resized with certain ﬂexibility. These features make hardware virtualization, the
ideal technology to create a virtual infrastructure that partitions a data center
among multiple tenants.
Self-Service, On-Demand Resource Provisioning. Self-service access to
resources has been perceived as one the most attractive features of clouds. This
feature enables users to directly obtain services from clouds, such as spawning
the creation of a server and tailoring its software, conﬁgurations, and security
policies, without interacting with a human system administrator. This cap-
ability “eliminates the need for more time-consuming, labor-intensive, human-
driven procurement processes familiar to many in IT” [46]. Therefore, exposing
a self-service interface, through which users can easily interact with the system,
is a highly desirable feature of a VI manager.
Multiple Backend Hypervisors. Different virtualization models and tools
offer different beneﬁts, drawbacks, and limitations. Thus, some VI managers
provide a uniform management layer regardless of the virtualization technol-
ogy used. This characteristic is more visible in open-source VI managers, which
usually provide pluggable drivers to interact with multiple hypervisors [7]. In
this direction, the aim of libvirt [47] is to provide a uniform API that VI
managers can use to manage domains (a VM or container running an instance
of an operating system) in virtualized nodes using standard operations that
abstract hypervisor speciﬁc calls.
Storage Virtualization. Virtualizing storage means abstracting logical sto-
rage from physical storage. By consolidating all available storage devices in a
data center, it allows creating virtual disks independent from device and
location. Storage devices are commonly organized in a storage area network
(SAN) and attached to servers via protocols such as Fibre Channel, iSCSI, and
18
INTRODUCTION TO CLOUD COMPUTING


NFS; a storage controller provides the layer of abstraction between virtual and
physical storage [48].
In the VI management sphere, storage virtualization support is often
restricted to commercial products of companies such as VMWare and Citrix.
Other products feature ways of pooling and managing storage devices, but
administrators are still aware of each individual device.
Interface to Public Clouds. Researchers have perceived that extending the
capacity of a local in-house computing infrastructure by borrowing resources
from public clouds is advantageous. In this fashion, institutions can make good
use of their available resources and, in case of spikes in demand, extra load can
be ofﬂoaded to rented resources [45].
A VI manager can be used in a hybrid cloud setup if it offers a driver to
manage the life cycle of virtualized resources obtained from external cloud
providers. To the applications, the use of leased resources must ideally be
transparent.
Virtual Networking. Virtual networks allow creating an isolated network on
top of a physical infrastructure independently from physical topology and
locations [49]. A virtual LAN (VLAN) allows isolating trafﬁc that shares a
switched network, allowing VMs to be grouped into the same broadcast
domain. Additionally, a VLAN can be conﬁgured to block trafﬁc originated
from VMs from other networks. Similarly, the VPN (virtual private network)
concept is used to describe a secure and private overlay network on top of a
public network (most commonly the public Internet) [50].
Support for creating and conﬁguring virtual networks to group VMs placed
throughout a data center is provided by most VI managers. Additionally, VI
managers that interface with public clouds often support secure VPNs
connecting local and remote VMs.
Dynamic Resource Allocation. Increased awareness of energy consumption
in data centers has encouraged the practice of dynamic consolidating VMs in a
fewer
number of servers. In cloud
infrastructures, where
applications
have variable and dynamic needs, capacity management and demand predic-
tion are especially complicated. This fact triggers the need for dynamic resource
allocation aiming at obtaining a timely match of supply and demand [51].
Energy consumption reduction and better management of SLAs can be
achieved by dynamically remapping VMs to physical machines at regular
intervals. Machines that are not assigned any VM can be turned off or put on a
low power state. In the same fashion, overheating can be avoided by moving
load away from hotspots [52].
A number of VI managers include a dynamic resource allocation feature that
continuously monitors utilization across resource pools and reallocates avail-
able resources among VMs according to application needs.
1.5
CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURE MANAGEMENT
19
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>


Virtual Clusters. Several VI managers can holistically manage groups of
VMs. This feature is useful for provisioning computing virtual clusters on
demand, and interconnected VMs for multi-tier Internet applications [53].
Reservation and Negotiation Mechanism. When users request computa-
tional resources to available at a speciﬁc time, requests are termed advance
reservations (AR), in contrast to best-effort requests, when users request
resources whenever available [54]. To support complex requests, such as AR,
a VI manager must allow users to “lease” resources expressing more complex
terms (e.g., the period of time of a reservation). This is especially useful in
clouds on which resources are scarce; since not all requests may be satisﬁed
immediately, they can beneﬁt of VM placement strategies that support queues,
priorities, and advance reservations [55].
Additionally, leases may be negotiated and renegotiated, allowing provider
and consumer to modify a lease or present counter proposals until an
agreement is reached. This feature is illustrated by the case in which an AR
request for a given slot cannot be satisﬁed, but the provider can offer a distinct
slot that is still satisfactory to the user. This problem has been addressed in
OpenPEX, which incorporates a bilateral negotiation protocol that allows
users and providers to come to an alternative agreement by exchanging offers
and counter offers [56].
High Availability and Data Recovery. The high availability (HA) feature of
VI managers aims at minimizing application downtime and preventing business
disruption. A few VI managers accomplish this by providing a failover
mechanism, which detects failure of both physical and virtual servers and
restarts VMs on healthy physical servers. This style of HA protects from host,
but not VM, failures [57, 58].
For mission critical applications, when a failover solution involving restart-
ing VMs does not sufﬁce, additional levels of fault tolerance that rely on
redundancy of VMs are implemented. In this style, redundant and synchro-
nized VMs (running or in standby) are kept in a secondary physical server. The
HA solution monitors failures of system components such as servers, VMs,
disks, and network and ensures that a duplicate VM serves the application in
case of failures [58].
Data backup in clouds should take into account the high data volume
involved in VM management. Frequent backup of a large number of VMs,
each one with multiple virtual disks attached, should be done with minimal
interference in the systems performance. In this sense, some VI managers offer
data protection mechanisms that perform incremental backups of VM images.
The backup workload is often assigned to proxies, thus ofﬂoading production
server and reducing network overhead [59].
20
INTRODUCTION TO CLOUD COMPUTING


1.5.2
Case Studies
In this section, we describe the main features of the most popular VI managers
available. Only the most prominent and distinguishing features of each tool are
discussed in detail. A detailed side-by-side feature comparison of VI managers
is presented in Table 1.1.
Apache VCL. The Virtual Computing Lab [60, 61] project has been incepted
in 2004 by researchers at the North Carolina State University as a way to
provide customized environments to computer lab users. The software compo-
nents that support NCSU’s initiative have been released as open-source and
incorporated by the Apache Foundation.
Since its inception, the main objective of VCL has been providing desktop
(virtual lab) and HPC computing environments anytime, in a ﬂexible cost-
effective way and with minimal intervention of IT staff. In this sense, VCL was
one of the ﬁrst projects to create a tool with features such as: self-service Web
portal, to reduce administrative burden; advance reservation of capacity, to
provide resources during classes; and deployment of customized machine
images on multiple computers, to provide clusters on demand.
In summary, Apache VCL provides the following features: (i) multi-platform
controller, based on Apache/PHP; (ii) Web portal and XML-RPC interfaces;
(iii) support for VMware hypervisors (ESX, ESXi, and Server); (iv) virtual
networks; (v) virtual clusters; and (vi) advance reservation of capacity.
AppLogic. AppLogic [62] is a commercial VI manager, the ﬂagship product of
3tera Inc. from California, USA. The company has labeled this product as a
Grid Operating System.
AppLogic provides a fabric to manage clusters of virtualized servers,
focusing on managing multi-tier Web applications. It views an entire applica-
tion as a collection of components that must be managed as a single entity.
Several components such as ﬁrewalls, load balancers, Web servers, application
servers, and database servers can be set up and linked together. Whenever the
application is started, the system manufactures and assembles the virtual
infrastructure required to run it. Once the application is stopped, AppLogic
tears down the infrastructure built for it [63].
AppLogic offers dynamic appliances to add functionality such as Disaster
Recovery and Power optimization to applications [62]. The key differential of
this approach is that additional functionalities are implemented as another
pluggable appliance instead of being added as a core functionality of the VI
manager.
In summary, 3tera AppLogic provides the following features: Linux-based
controller; CLI and GUI interfaces; Xen backend; Global Volume Store (GVS)
storage virtualization; virtual networks; virtual clusters; dynamic resource
allocation; high availability; and data protection.
1.5
CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURE MANAGEMENT
21


TABLE 1.1. Feature Comparison of Virtual Infrastructure Managers
License
Installation
Platform of
Controller
Client UI,
API, Language
Bindings
Backend
Hypervisor(s)
Storage
Virtualization
Interface to
Public Cloud
Virtual
Networks
Dynamic Resource
Allocation
Advance
Reservation of
Capacity
High
Availability
Data
Protection
Apache
VCL
Apache v2
Multi-
platform
(Apache/
PHP)
Portal,
XML-RPC
VMware
ESX, ESXi,
Server
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
AppLogic
Proprietary
Linux
GUI, CLI
Xen
Global
Volume
Store (GVS)
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Citrix Essentials
Proprietary
Windows
GUI, CLI,
Portal,
XML-RPC
XenServer,
Hyper-V
Citrix
Storage
Link
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Enomaly ECP
GPL v3
Linux
Portal, WS
Xen
No
Amazon EC2
Yes
No
No
No
No
Eucalyptus
BSD
Linux
EC2 WS, CLI
Xen, KVM
No
EC2
Yes
No
No
No
No
Nimbus
Apache v2
Linux
EC2 WS,
WSRF, CLI
Xen, KVM
No
EC2
Yes
Via
integration with
OpenNebula
Yes (via
integration with
OpenNebula)
No
No
OpenNEbula
Apache v2
Linux
XML-RPC,
CLI, Java
Xen, KVM
No
Amazon EC2,
Elastic Hosts
Yes
Yes
Yes
(via Haizea)
No
No
OpenPEX
GPL v2
Multiplatform
(Java)
Portal, WS
XenServer
No
No
No
No
Yes
No
No
oVirt
GPL v2
Fedora Linux
Portal
KVM
No
No
No
No
No
No
No
Platform
ISF
Proprietary
Linux
Portal
Hyper-V
XenServer,
VMWare ESX
No
EC2, IBM CoD,
HP Enterprise
Services
Yes
Yes
Yes
Unclear
Unclear
Platform VMO
Proprietary
Linux,
Windows
Portal
XenServer
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
VMWare
vSphere
Proprietary
Linux,
Windows
CLI, GUI,
Portal, WS
VMware
ESX, ESXi
VMware
vStorage
VMFS
VMware
vCloud partners
Yes
VMware
DRM
No
Yes
Yes
22


Citrix Essentials. The Citrix Essentials suite is one the most feature complete
VI management software available, focusing on management and automation
of data centers. It is essentially a hypervisor-agnostic solution, currently
supporting Citrix XenServer and Microsoft Hyper-V [64].
By providing several access interfaces, it facilitates both human and
programmatic interaction with the controller. Automation of tasks is also
aided by a workﬂow orchestration mechanism.
In summary, Citrix Essentials provides the following features: Windows-
based controller; GUI, CLI, Web portal, and XML-RPC interfaces; support
for XenServer and Hyper-V hypervisors; Citrix Storage Link storage virtuali-
zation; virtual networks; dynamic resource allocation; three-level high avail-
ability (i.e., recovery by VM restart, recovery by activating paused duplicate
VM, and running duplicate VM continuously) [58]; data protection with Citrix
Consolidated Backup.
Enomaly ECP. The Enomaly Elastic Computing Platform, in its most
complete edition, offers most features a service provider needs to build an
IaaS cloud.
Most notably, ECP Service Provider Edition offers a Web-based customer
dashboard that allows users to fully control the life cycle of VMs. Usage
accounting is performed in real time and can be viewed by users. Similar to the
functionality of virtual appliance marketplaces, ECP allows providers and
users to package and exchange applications.
In summary, Enomaly ECP provides the following features: Linux-based
controller; Web portal and Web services (REST) interfaces; Xen back-end;
interface to the Amazon EC2 public cloud; virtual networks; virtual clusters
(ElasticValet).
Eucalyptus. The Eucalyptus [39] framework was one of the ﬁrst open-source
projects to focus on building IaaS clouds. It has been developed with the intent
of providing an open-source implementation nearly identical in functionality to
Amazon Web Services APIs. Therefore, users can interact with a Eucalyptus
cloud using the same tools they use to access Amazon EC2. It also distinguishes
itself from other tools because it provides a storage cloud API—emulating the
Amazon S3 API—for storing general user data and VM images.
In summary, Eucalyptus provides the following features: Linux-based con-
troller with administration Web portal; EC2-compatible (SOAP, Query) and S3-
compatible (SOAP, REST) CLI and Web portal interfaces; Xen, KVM, and
VMWare backends; Amazon EBS-compatible virtual storage devices; interface
to the Amazon EC2 public cloud; virtual networks.
Nimbus3. The Nimbus toolkit [20] is built on top of the Globus framework.
Nimbus provides most features in common with other open-source VI
managers, such as an EC2-compatible front-end API, support to Xen, and a
backend interface to Amazon EC2. However, it distinguishes from others by
1.5
CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURE MANAGEMENT
23


providing a Globus Web Services Resource Framework (WSRF) interface. It
also provides a backend service, named Pilot, which spawns VMs on clusters
managed by a local resource manager (LRM) such as PBS and SGE.
Nimbus’ core was engineered around the Spring framework to be easily
extensible, thus allowing several internal components to be replaced and also
eases the integration with other systems.
In summary, Nimbus provides the following features: Linux-based control-
ler; EC2-compatible (SOAP) and WSRF interfaces; Xen and KVM backend
and a Pilot program to spawn VMs through an LRM; interface to the Amazon
EC2 public cloud; virtual networks; one-click virtual clusters.
OpenNebula. OpenNebula is one of the most feature-rich open-source VI
managers. It was initially conceived to manage local virtual infrastructure, but
has also included remote interfaces that make it viable to build public clouds.
Altogether, four programming APIs are available: XML-RPC and libvirt [47]
for local interaction; a subset of EC2 (Query) APIs and the OpenNebula Cloud
API (OCA) for public access [7, 65].
Its architecture is modular, encompassing several specialized pluggable
components. The Core module orchestrates physical servers and their hypervi-
sors, storage nodes, and network fabric. Management operations are performed
through pluggable Drivers, which interact with APIs of hypervisors, storage and
network technologies, and public clouds. The Scheduler module, which is in
charge of assigning pending VM requests to physical hosts, offers dynamic
resource allocation features. Administrators can choose between different
scheduling objectives such as packing VMs in fewer hosts or keeping the load
balanced. Via integration with the Haizea lease scheduler [66], OpenNebula also
supports advance reservation of capacity and queuing of best-effort leases [7].
In summary, OpenNebula provides the following features: Linux-based
controller; CLI, XML-RPC, EC2-compatible Query and OCA interfaces;
Xen, KVM, and VMware backend; interface to public clouds (Amazon EC2,
ElasticHosts); virtual networks; dynamic resource allocation; advance reserva-
tion of capacity.
OpenPEX. OpenPEX (Open Provisioning and EXecution Environment) was
constructed around the notion of using advance reservations as the primary
method for allocating VM instances. It distinguishes from other VI managers by
its leases negotiation mechanism, which incorporates a bilateral negotiation
protocol that allows users and providers to come to an agreement by exchanging
offers and counter offers when their original requests cannot be satisﬁed.
In summary, OpenPEX provides the following features: multi-platform
(Java) controller; Web portal and Web services (REST) interfaces; Citrix
XenServer backend; advance reservation of capacity with negotiation [56].
oVirt. oVirt is an open-source VI manager, sponsored by Red Hat’s Emergent
Technology group. It provides most of the basic features of other VI managers,
24
INTRODUCTION TO CLOUD COMPUTING


including support for managing physical server pools, storage pools, user
accounts, and VMs. All features are accessible through a Web interface [67].
The oVirt admin node, which is also a VM, provides a Web server, secure
authentication services based on freeIPA, and provisioning services to manage
VM image and their transfer to the managed nodes. Each managed node libvirt,
which interfaces with the hypervisor.
In summary, oVirt provides the following features: Fedora Linux-based
controller packaged as a virtual appliance; Web portal interface; KVM backend.
Platform ISF. Infrastructure Sharing Facility (ISF) is the VI manager offering
from Platform Computing [68]. The company, mainly through its LSF family
of products, has been serving the HPC market for several years.
ISF’s architecture is divided into three layers. The top most Service Delivery
layer includes the user interfaces (i.e., self-service portal and APIs); the
Allocation Engine provides reservation and allocation policies; and the bottom
layer—Resource Integrations—provides adapters to interact with hypervisors,
provisioning tools, and other systems (i.e., external public clouds). The
Allocation Engine also provides policies to address several objectives, such as
minimizing energy consumption, reducing impact of failures, and maximizing
application performance [44].
ISF is built upon Platform’s VM Orchestrator, which, as a standalone
product, aims at speeding up delivery of VMs to end users. It also provides high
availability by restarting VMs when hosts fail and duplicating the VM that
hosts the VMO controller [69].
In summary, ISF provides the following features: Linux-based controller
packaged as a virtual appliance; Web portal interface; dynamic resource
allocation; advance reservation of capacity; high availability.
VMWare vSphere and vCloud. vSphere is VMware’s suite of tools aimed at
transforming IT infrastructures into private clouds [36, 43]. It distinguishes
from other VI managers as one of the most feature-rich, due to the company’s
several offerings in all levels the architecture.
In the vSphere architecture, servers run on the ESXi platform. A separate
server runs vCenter Server, which centralizes control over the entire virtual
infrastructure. Through the vSphere Client software, administrators connect to
vCenter Server to perform various tasks.
The Distributed Resource Scheduler (DRS) makes allocation decisions
based on predeﬁned rules and policies. It continuously monitors the amount
of resources available to VMs and, if necessary, makes allocation changes to
meet VM requirements. In the storage virtualization realm, vStorage VMFS is
a cluster ﬁle system to provide aggregate several disks in a single volume.
VMFS is especially optimized to store VM images and virtual disks. It supports
storage equipment that use Fibre Channel or iSCSI SAN.
In its basic setup, vSphere is essentially a private administration suite. Self-
service VM provisioning to end users is provided via the vCloud API, which
1.5
CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURE MANAGEMENT
25


interfaces with vCenter Server. In this conﬁguration, vSphere can be used by
service providers to build public clouds. In terms of interfacing with public
clouds, vSphere interfaces with the vCloud API, thus enabling cloud-bursting
into external clouds.
In summary, vSphere provides the following features: Windows-based
controller (vCenter Server); CLI, GUI, Web portal, and Web services interfaces;
VMware ESX, ESXi backend; VMware vStorage VMFS storage virtualization;
interface to external clouds (VMware vCloud partners); virtual networks
(VMWare Distributed Switch); dynamic resource allocation (VMware DRM);
high availability; data protection (VMWare Consolidated Backup).
1.6
INFRASTRUCTURE AS A SERVICE PROVIDERS
Public Infrastructure as a Service providers commonly offer virtual servers
containing one or more CPUs, running several choices of operating systems
and a customized software stack. In addition, storage space and communica-
tion facilities are often provided.
1.6.1
Features
In spite of being based on a common set of features, IaaS offerings can be
distinguished by the availability of specialized features that inﬂuence the
costbeneﬁt ratio to be experienced by user applications when moved to
the cloud. The most relevant features are: (i) geographic distribution of data
centers; (ii) variety of user interfaces and APIs to access the system; (iii)
specialized components and services that aid particular applications (e.g., load-
balancers, ﬁrewalls); (iv) choice of virtualization platform and operating systems;
and (v) different billing methods and period (e.g., prepaid vs. post-paid, hourly
vs. monthly).
Geographic Presence. To improve availability and responsiveness, a provi-
der of worldwide services would typically build several data centers distributed
around the world. For example, Amazon Web Services presents the concept of
“availability zones” and “regions” for its EC2 service. Availability zones are
“distinct locations that are engineered to be insulated from failures in other
availability zones and provide inexpensive, low-latency network connectivity to
other availability zones in the same region.” Regions, in turn, “are geographi-
cally dispersed and will be in separate geographic areas or countries [70].”
User Interfaces and Access to Servers. Ideally, a public IaaS provider
must provide multiple access means to its cloud, thus catering for various users
and their preferences. Different types of user interfaces (UI) provide different
levels of abstraction, the most common being graphical user interfaces (GUI),
command-line tools (CLI), and Web service (WS) APIs.
26
INTRODUCTION TO CLOUD COMPUTING


GUIs are preferred by end users who need to launch, customize, and
monitor a few virtual servers and do not necessary need to repeat the process
several times. On the other hand, CLIs offer more ﬂexibility and the possibility
of automating repetitive tasks via scripts (e.g., start and shutdown a number of
virtual servers at regular intervals). WS APIs offer programmatic access to a
cloud using standard HTTP requests, thus allowing complex services to be built
on top of IaaS clouds.
Advance Reservation of Capacity. Advance reservations allow users to
request for an IaaS provider to reserve resources for a speciﬁc time frame in the
future, thus ensuring that cloud resources will be available at that time.
However, most clouds only support best-effort requests; that is, users requests
are server whenever resources are available [54].
Amazon Reserved Instances is a form of advance reservation of capacity,
allowing users to pay a ﬁxed amount of money in advance to guarantee
resource availability at anytime during an agreed period and then paying a
discounted hourly rate when resources are in use. However, only long periods
of 1 to 3 years are offered; therefore, users cannot express their reservations in
ﬁner granularities—for example, hours or days.
Automatic Scaling and Load Balancing. As mentioned earlier in this
chapter, elasticity is a key characteristic of the cloud computing model.
Applications often need to scale up and down to meet varying load conditions.
Automatic scaling is a highly desirable feature of IaaS clouds. It allow users to
set conditions for when they want their applications to scale up and down,
based on application-speciﬁc metrics such as transactions per second, number
of simultaneous users, request latency, and so forth.
When the number of virtual servers is increased by automatic scaling,
incoming trafﬁc must be automatically distributed among the available servers.
This activity enables applications to promptly respond to trafﬁc increase while
also achieving greater fault tolerance.
Service-Level Agreement. Service-level agreements (SLAs) are offered by
IaaS providers to express their commitment to delivery of a certain QoS. To
customers it serves as a warranty. An SLA usually include availability and
performance guarantees. Additionally, metrics must be agreed upon by all
parties as well as penalties for violating these expectations.
Most IaaS providers focus their SLA terms on availability guarantees,
specifying the minimum percentage of time the system will be available during a
certain period. For instance, Amazon EC2 states that “if the annual uptime
Percentage for a customer drops below 99.95% for the service year, that
customer is eligible to receive a service credit equal to 10% of their bill.3”
3 http://aws.amazon.com/ec2-sla
1.6
INFRASTRUCTURE AS A SERVICE PROVIDERS
27


Hypervisor and Operating System Choice. Traditionally, IaaS offerings
have been based on heavily customized open-source Xen deployments. IaaS
providers needed expertise in Linux, networking, virtualization, metering,
resource management, and many other low-level aspects to successfully deploy
and maintain their cloud offerings. More recently, there has been an emergence
of turnkey IaaS platforms such as VMWare vCloud and Citrix Cloud Center
(C3) which have lowered the barrier of entry for IaaS competitors, leading to a
rapid expansion in the IaaS marketplace.
1.6.2
Case Studies
In this section, we describe the main features of the most popular public IaaS
clouds. Only the most prominent and distinguishing features of each one are
discussed in detail. A detailed side-by-side feature comparison of IaaS offerings
is presented in Table 1.2.
Amazon Web Services. Amazon WS4 (AWS) is one of the major players in
the cloud computing market. It pioneered the introduction of IaaS clouds in
2006. It offers a variety cloud services, most notably: S3 (storage), EC2 (virtual
servers), Cloudfront (content delivery), Cloudfront Streaming (video stream-
ing), SimpleDB (structured datastore), RDS (Relational Database), SQS
(reliable messaging), and Elastic MapReduce (data processing).
The Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) offers Xen-based virtual servers (instances)
that can be instantiated from Amazon Machine Images (AMIs). Instances are
available in a variety of sizes, operating systems, architectures, and price. CPU
capacity of instances is measured in Amazon Compute Units and, although ﬁxed
for each instance, vary among instance types from 1 (small instance) to 20 (high
CPU instance). Each instance provides a certain amount of nonpersistent disk
space; a persistence disk service (Elastic Block Storage) allows attaching virtual
disks to instances with space up to 1TB.
Elasticity can be achieved by combining the CloudWatch, Auto Scaling, and
Elastic Load Balancing features, which allow the number of instances to scale
up and down automatically based on a set of customizable rules, and trafﬁc to
be distributed across available instances. Fixed IP address (Elastic IPs) are not
available by default, but can be obtained at an additional cost.
In summary, Amazon EC2 provides the following features: multiple data
centers available in the United States (East and West) and Europe; CLI, Web
services (SOAP and Query), Web-based console user interfaces; access to
instance mainly via SSH (Linux) and Remote Desktop (Windows); advanced
reservation of capacity (aka reserved instances) that guarantees availability for
periods of 1 and 3 years; 99.5% availability SLA; per hour pricing; Linux and
Windows operating systems; automatic scaling; load balancing.
4 http://aws.amazon.com
28
INTRODUCTION TO CLOUD COMPUTING


TABLE 1.2. Feature Comparison Public Cloud Offerings (Infrastructure as a Service)
Geographic
Presence
Client UI
API Language
Bindings
Primary
Access to
Server
Advance
Reservation of
Capacity
SLA
Uptime
Smallest
Billing
Unit
Hypervisor
Guest
Operating
Systems
Automated
Horizontal
Scaling
Load
Balancing
Runtime
Server
Resizing/
Vertical
Scaling
Instance Hardware Capacity
Processor
Memory
Storage
Amazon
EC2
US East,
Europe
CLI, WS,
Portal
SSH (Linux),
Remote
Desktop
(Windows)
Amazon
reserved
instances
(Available in
1 or 3 years
terms, starting
from reservation
time)
99.95% Hour
Xen
Linux,
Windows
Available
with
Amazon
CloudWatch
Elastic Load
Balancing
No
120 EC2
compute
units
1.715
GB
1601690 GB
1 GB1 TB
(per EBS
volume)
Flexiscale
UK
Web Console
SSH
No
100%
Hour
Xen
Linux,
Windows
No
Zeus
software
loadbalancing
Processors,
memory
(requires
reboot)
14 CPUs
0.516
GB
20270 GB
GoGrid
REST, Java,
PHP, Python,
Ruby
SSH
No
100%
Hour
Xen
Linux,
Windows
No
Hardware
(F5)
No
16 CPUs
0.58
GB
30480 GB
Joyent
Cloud
US (Emery-
ville,
CA; San
Diego,
CA; Andover,
MA; Dallas,
TX)
SSH,
VirtualMin
(Web-based
system
administration)
No
100%
Month
OS Level
(Solaris
Containers)
OpenSolaris No
Both
hardware
(F5 networks)
and software
(Zeus)
Automatic
CPU bursting
(up to 8
CPUs)
1/168 CPUs
0.2532
GB
5100 GB
Rackspace
Cloud
Servers
US
(Dallas, TX)
Portal, REST,
Python, PHP,
Java, C#/.
NET
SSH
No
100%
Hour
Xen
Linux
No
No
Memory, disk
(requires
reboot)
Automatic
CPU bursting
(up to 100%
of available
CPU power
of physical
host)
Quad-core
CPU (CPU
power is
weighed
proportionally
to memory
size)
0.2516
GB
10620 GB
29


Flexiscale. Flexiscale is a UK-based provider offering services similar in
nature to Amazon Web Services. However, its virtual servers offer some
distinct features, most notably: persistent storage by default, ﬁxed IP addresses,
dedicated VLAN, a wider range of server sizes, and runtime adjustment of CPU
capacity (aka CPU bursting/vertical scaling). Similar to the clouds, this service
is also priced by the hour.
In summary, the Flexiscale cloud provides the following features: available
in UK; Web services (SOAP), Web-based user interfaces; access to virtual
server mainly via SSH (Linux) and Remote Desktop (Windows); 100%
availability SLA with automatic recovery of VMs in case of hardware failure;
per hour pricing; Linux and Windows operating systems; automatic scaling
(horizontal/vertical).
Joyent. Joyent’s Public Cloud offers servers based on Solaris containers
virtualization technology. These servers, dubbed accelerators, allow deploying
various specialized software-stack based on a customized version of Open-
Solaris operating system, which include by default a Web-based conﬁguration
tool and several pre-installed software, such as Apache, MySQL, PHP, Ruby
on Rails, and Java. Software load balancing is available as an accelerator in
addition to hardware load balancers.
A notable feature of Joyent’s virtual servers is automatic vertical scaling of
CPU cores, which means a virtual server can make use of additional CPUs
automatically up to the maximum number of cores available in the physical
host.
In summary, the Joyent public cloud offers the following features: multiple
geographic locations in the United States; Web-based user interface; access to
virtual server via SSH and Web-based administration tool; 100% availability
SLA; per month pricing; OS-level virtualization Solaris containers; Open-
Solaris operating systems; automatic scaling (vertical).
GoGrid. GoGrid, like many other IaaS providers, allows its customers to
utilize a range of pre-made Windows and Linux images, in a range of ﬁxed
instance sizes. GoGrid also offers “value-added” stacks on top for applications
such as high-volume Web serving, e-Commerce, and database stores.
It offers some notable features, such as a “hybrid hosting” facility, which
combines traditional dedicated hosts with auto-scaling cloud server infrastruc-
ture. In this approach, users can take advantage of dedicated hosting (which
may be required due to speciﬁc performance, security or legal compliance
reasons) and combine it with on-demand cloud infrastructure as appropriate,
taking the beneﬁts of each style of computing.
As part of its core IaaS offerings, GoGrid also provides free hardware load
balancing, auto-scaling capabilities, and persistent storage, features that
typically add an additional cost for most other IaaS providers.
30
INTRODUCTION TO CLOUD COMPUTING


Rackspace Cloud Servers. Rackspace Cloud Servers is an IaaS solution
that provides ﬁxed size instances in the cloud. Cloud Servers offers a range of
Linux-based pre-made images. A user can request different-sized images, where
the size is measured by requested RAM, not CPU.
Like GoGrid, Cloud Servers also offers hybrid approach where dedicated
and cloud server infrastructures can be combined to take the best aspects of
both styles of hosting as required. Cloud Servers, as part of its default offering,
enables ﬁxed (static) IP addresses, persistent storage, and load balancing (via
A-DNS) at no additional cost.
1.7
PLATFORM AS A SERVICE PROVIDERS
Public Platform as a Service providers commonly offer a development and
deployment environment that allow users to create and run their applications
with little or no concern to low-level details of the platform. In addition,
speciﬁc programming languages and frameworks are made available in the
platform, as well as other services such as persistent data storage and in-
memory caches.
1.7.1
Features
Programming Models, Languages, and Frameworks. Programming mod-
els made available by IaaS providers deﬁne how users can express their
applications using higher levels of abstraction and efﬁciently run them on the
cloud platform. Each model aims at efﬁciently solving a particular problem. In
the cloud computing domain, the most common activities that require
specialized models are: processing of large dataset in clusters of computers
(MapReduce model), development of request-based Web services and applica-
tions; deﬁnition and orchestration of business processes in the form of work-
ﬂows (Workﬂow model); and high-performance distributed execution of
various computational tasks.
For user convenience, PaaS providers usually support multiple programming
languages. Most commonly used languages in platforms include Python and
Java (e.g., Google AppEngine), .NET languages (e.g., Microsoft Azure),
and Ruby (e.g., Heroku). Force.com has devised its own programming
language (Apex) and an Excel-like query language, which provide higher levels
of abstraction to key platform functionalities.
A variety of software frameworks are usually made available to PaaS
developers, depending on application focus. Providers that focus on Web
and enterprise application hosting offer popular frameworks such as Ruby on
Rails, Spring, Java EE, and .NET.
Persistence Options. A persistence layer is essential to allow applications to
record their state and recover it in case of crashes, as well as to store user data.
1.7
PLATFORM AS A SERVICE PROVIDERS
31


Traditionally, Web and enterprise application developers have chosen rela-
tional databases as the preferred persistence method. These databases offer fast
and reliable structured data storage and transaction processing, but may lack
scalability to handle several petabytes of data stored in commodity computers
[71].
In the cloud computing domain, distributed storage technologies have
emerged, which seek to be robust and highly scalable, at the expense of
relational structure and convenient query languages. For example, Amazon
SimpleDB and Google AppEngine datastore offer schema-less, automatically
indexed database services [70]. Data queries can be performed only on
individual tables; that is, join operations are unsupported for the sake of
scalability.
1.7.2
Case Studies
In this section, we describe the main features of some Platform as Service
(PaaS) offerings. A more detailed side-by-side feature comparison of VI
managers is presented in Table 1.3.
Aneka. Aneka [72] is a .NET-based service-oriented resource management
and development platform. Each server in an Aneka deployment (dubbed
Aneka cloud node) hosts the Aneka container, which provides the base
infrastructure that consists of services for persistence, security (authorization,
authentication and auditing), and communication (message handling and
dispatching). Cloud nodes can be either physical server, virtual machines
(XenServer and VMware are supported), and instances rented from Amazon
EC2.
The Aneka container can also host any number of optional services that can
be added by developers to augment the capabilities of an Aneka Cloud node,
thus providing a single, extensible framework for orchestrating various
application models.
Several programming models are supported by such task models to enable
execution of legacy HPC applications and MapReduce, which enables a variety
of data-mining and search applications.
Users request resources via a client to a reservation services manager of the
Aneka master node, which manages all cloud nodes and contains scheduling
service to distribute request to cloud nodes.
App Engine. Google App Engine lets you run your Python and Java Web
applications on elastic infrastructure supplied by Google. App Engine allows
your applications to scale dynamically as your trafﬁc and data storage
requirements increase or decrease. It gives developers a choice between a
Python stack and Java. The App Engine serving architecture is notable in
that it allows real-time auto-scaling without virtualization for many common
types of Web applications. However, such auto-scaling is dependent on the
32
INTRODUCTION TO CLOUD COMPUTING


TABLE 1.3. Feature Comparison of Platform-as-a-Service Cloud Offerings
Target Use
Programming
Language,
Frameworks
Developer
Tools
Programming
Models
Persistence
Options
Automatic
Scaling
Backend
Infrastructure
Providers
Aneka
.Net enterprise
applications,
HPC
.NET
Standalone
SDK
Threads, Task,
MapReduce
Flat ﬁles,
RDBMS, HDFS
No
Amazon EC2
AppEngine
Web
applications
Python, Java
Eclipse-based
IDE
Request-based
Web
programming
BigTable
Yes
Own data
centers
Force.com
Enterprise
applications
(esp. CRM)
Apex
Eclipse-based
IDE, Web-
based wizard
Workﬂow,
Excel-like
formula
language,
Request-based
web
programming
Own object
database
Unclear
Own data
centers
Microsoft
Windows
Azure
Enterprise and
Web
applications
.NET
Azure tools for
Microsoft
Visual Studio
Unrestricted
Table/BLOB/
queue storage,
SQL services
Yes
Own data
centers
Heroku
Web
applications
Ruby on Rails
Command-line
tools
Request-
based web
programming
PostgreSQL,
Amazon RDS
Yes
Amazon EC2
Amazon
Elastic
MapReduce
Data processing
Hive and Pig,
Cascading,
Java, Ruby,
Perl, Python,
PHP, R,
C++
Karmasphere
Studio for
Hadoop (Net-
Beans-based)
MapReduce
Amazon S3
No
Amazon EC2
33


application developer using a limited subset of the native APIs on each
platform, and in some instances you need to use speciﬁc Google APIs such
as URLFetch, Datastore, and memcache in place of certain native API calls.
For example, a deployed App Engine application cannot write to the ﬁle system
directly (you must use the Google Datastore) or open a socket or access
another host directly (you must use Google URL fetch service). A Java
application cannot create a new Thread either.
Microsoft Azure. Microsoft Azure Cloud Services offers developers a hosted .
NET Stack (C#, VB.Net, ASP.NET). In addition, a Java & Ruby SDK for
.NET Services is also available. The Azure system consists of a number of
elements. The Windows Azure Fabric Controller provides auto-scaling and
reliability, and it manages memory resources and load balancing. The .NET
Service Bus registers and connects applications together. The .NET Access
Control identity providers include enterprise directories and Windows LiveID.
Finally, the .NET Workﬂow allows construction and execution of workﬂow
instances.
Force.com. In conjunction with the Salesforce.com service, the Force.com
PaaS allows developers to create add-on functionality that integrates into main
Salesforce CRM SaaS application.
Force.com offers developers two approaches to create applications that can
be deployed on its SaaS plaform: a hosted Apex or Visualforce application.
Apex is a proprietary Java-like language that can be used to create Salesforce
applications. Visualforce is an XML-like syntax for building UIs in HTML,
AJAX, or Flex to overlay over the Salesforce hosted CRM system. An
application store called AppExchange is also provided, which offers a paid &
free application directory.
Heroku. Heroku is a platform for instant deployment of Ruby on Rails Web
applications. In the Heroku system, servers are invisibly managed by the
platform and are never exposed to users. Applications are automatically
dispersed across different CPU cores and servers, maximizing performance
and minimizing contention. Heroku has an advanced logic layer than can
automatically route around failures, ensuring seamless and uninterrupted
service at all times.
1.8
CHALLENGES AND RISKS
Despite the initial success and popularity of the cloud computing paradigm and
the extensive availability of providers and tools, a signiﬁcant number of
challenges and risks are inherent to this new model of computing. Providers,
developers, and end users must consider these challenges and risks to take good
advantage of cloud computing. Issues to be faced include user privacy, data
34
INTRODUCTION TO CLOUD COMPUTING


security, data lock-in, availability of service, disaster recovery, performance,
scalability, energy-efﬁciency, and programmability.
1.8.1
Security, Privacy, and Trust
Ambrust et al. [5] cite information security as a main issue: “current cloud
offerings are essentially public . . . exposing the system to more attacks.” For
this reason there are potentially additional challenges to make cloud computing
environments as secure as in-house IT systems. At the same time, existing, well-
understood technologies can be leveraged, such as data encryption, VLANs,
and ﬁrewalls.
Security and privacy affect the entire cloud computing stack, since there is a
massive use of third-party services and infrastructures that are used to host
important data or to perform critical operations. In this scenario, the trust
toward providers is fundamental to ensure the desired level of privacy for
applications hosted in the cloud [38].
Legal and regulatory issues also need attention. When data are moved into
the Cloud, providers may choose to locate them anywhere on the planet. The
physical location of data centers determines the set of laws that can be applied
to the management of data. For example, speciﬁc cryptography techniques
could not be used because they are not allowed in some countries. Similarly,
country laws can impose that sensitive data, such as patient health records, are
to be stored within national borders.
1.8.2
Data Lock-In and Standardization
A major concern of cloud computing users is about having their data locked-in
by a certain provider. Users may want to move data and applications out from
a provider that does not meet their requirements. However, in their current
form, cloud computing infrastructures and platforms do not employ standard
methods of storing user data and applications. Consequently, they do not
interoperate and user data are not portable.
The answer to this concern is standardization. In this direction, there are
efforts to create open standards for cloud computing.
The Cloud Computing Interoperability Forum (CCIF) was formed by
organizations such as Intel, Sun, and Cisco in order to “enable a global cloud
computing ecosystem whereby organizations are able to seamlessly work
together for the purposes for wider industry adoption of cloud computing
technology.” The development of the Uniﬁed Cloud Interface (UCI) by CCIF
aims at creating a standard programmatic point of access to an entire cloud
infrastructure.
In the hardware virtualization sphere, the Open Virtual Format (OVF) aims
at facilitating packing and distribution of software to be run on VMs so that
virtual appliances can be made portable—that is, seamlessly run on hypervisor
of different vendors.
1.8
CHALLENGES AND RISKS
35


1.8.3
Availability, Fault-Tolerance, and Disaster Recovery
It is expected that users will have certain expectations about the service level to
be provided once their applications are moved to the cloud. These expectations
include availability of the service, its overall performance, and what measures
are to be taken when something goes wrong in the system or its components. In
summary, users seek for a warranty before they can comfortably move their
business to the cloud.
SLAs, which include QoS requirements, must be ideally set up between
customers and cloud computing providers to act as warranty. An SLA speciﬁes
the details of the service to be provided, including availability and performance
guarantees. Additionally, metrics must be agreed upon by all parties, and
penalties for violating the expectations must also be approved.
1.8.4
Resource Management and Energy-Efﬁciency
One important challenge faced by providers of cloud computing services is the
efﬁcient management of virtualized resource pools. Physical resources such as
CPU cores, disk space, and network bandwidth must be sliced and shared
among virtual machines running potentially heterogeneous workloads.
The multi-dimensional nature of virtual machines complicates the activity
of ﬁnding a good mapping of VMs onto available physical hosts while
maximizing user utility. Dimensions to be considered include: number of
CPUs, amount of memory, size of virtual disks, and network bandwidth.
Dynamic VM mapping policies may leverage the ability to suspend, migrate,
and resume VMs as an easy way of preempting low-priority allocations in
favor of higher-priority ones. Migration of VMs also brings additional
challenges such as detecting when to initiate a migration, which VM to
migrate, and where to migrate. In addition, policies may take advantage of
live migration of virtual machines to relocate data center load without
signiﬁcantly disrupting running services. In this case, an additional concern
is the trade-off between the negative impact of a live migration on the
performance and stability of a service and the beneﬁts to be achieved with
that migration [73].
Another challenge concerns the outstanding amount of data to be managed
in various VM management activities. Such data amount is a result of
particular abilities of virtual machines, including the ability of traveling
through space (i.e., migration) and time (i.e., checkpointing and rewinding)
[74], operations that may be required in load balancing, backup, and recovery
scenarios. In addition, dynamic provisioning of new VMs and replicating
existing VMs require efﬁcient mechanisms to make VM block storage devices
(e.g., image ﬁles) quickly available at selected hosts.
Data centers consumer large amounts of electricity. According to a data
published by HP [4], 100 server racks can consume 1.3 MW of power and another
1.3 MW are required by the cooling system, thus costing USD 2.6 million per
36
INTRODUCTION TO CLOUD COMPUTING


year. Besides the monetary cost, data centers signiﬁcantly impact the environ-
ment in terms of CO2 emissions from the cooling systems [52].
In addition to optimize application performance, dynamic resource manage-
ment can also improve utilization and consequently minimize energy consump-
tion in data centers. This can be done by judiciously consolidating workload
onto smaller number of servers and turning off idle resources.
1.9
SUMMARY
Cloud computing is a new computing paradigm that offers a huge amount of
compute and storage resources to the masses. Individuals (e.g., scientists) and
enterprises (e.g., startup companies) can have access to these resources by
paying a small amount of money just for what is really needed.
This introductory chapter has surveyed many technologies that have led to
the advent of cloud computing, concluding that this new paradigm has been a
result of an evolution rather than a revolution.
In their various shapes and ﬂavors, clouds aim at offering compute, storage,
network, software, or a combination of those “as a service.” Infrastructure-,
Platform-, and Software-as-a-service are the three most common nomencla-
tures for the levels of abstraction of cloud computing services, ranging from
“raw” virtual servers to elaborate hosted applications.
A great popularity and apparent success have been visible in this area.
However, as discussed in this chapter, signiﬁcant challenges and risks need to
be tackled by industry and academia in order to guarantee the long-term
success of cloud computing. Visible trends in this sphere include the emergence
of standards; the creation of value-added services by augmenting, combining,
and brokering existing compute, storage, and software services; and the
availability of more providers in all levels, thus increasing competiveness and
innovation. In this sense, numerous opportunities exist for practitioners seeking
to create solutions for cloud computing.
REFERENCES
1.
I. Foster, The grid: Computing without bounds, Scientiﬁc American, vol. 288,
No. 4, (April 2003), pp. 7885.
2.
R. Buyya, C. S. Yeo, S. Venugopal, J. Broberg, and I. Brandic, Cloud computing
and emerging IT platforms: Vision, hype, and reality for delivering computing as
the 5th utility, Future Generation Computer Systems, 25:599616, 2009.
3.
L. M. Vaquero, L. Rodero-Merino, J. Caceres, and M. Lindner, A break in the
clouds: Towards a cloud deﬁnition, SIGCOMM Computer Communications
Review, 39:5055, 2009.
4.
McKinsey & Co., Clearing the Air on Cloud Computing, Technical Report, 2009.
REFERENCES
37


5.
M. Armbrust, A. Fox, R. Grifﬁth, A. D. Joseph, and R. Katz, Above the Clouds:
A Berkeley View of Cloud Computing, UC Berkeley Reliable Adaptive Distributed
Systems Laboratory White Paper, 2009.
6.
P. Mell and T. Grance, The NIST Deﬁnition of Cloud Computing, National
Institute of Standards and Technology, Information Technology Laboratory,
Technical Report Version 15, 2009.
7.
B. Sotomayor, R. S. Montero, I. M. Llorente, and I. Foster, Virtual infrastructure
management in private and hybrid clouds, IEEE Internet Computing, 13(5):1422,
September/October, 2009.
8.
N. Carr, The Big Switch: Rewiring the World, from Edison to Google.W. W.
Norton & Co., New York, 2008.
9.
M. A. Rappa, The utility business model and the future of computing systems,
IBM Systems Journal, 43(1):3242, 2004.
10.
C. S. Yeo et al., Utility computing on global grids, Chapter 143, Hossein Bidgoli
(ed.),
The Handbook of Computer Networks, ISBN: 978-0-471-78461-6, John
Wiley & Sons, New York, USA, 2007.
11.
I. Foster and S. Tuecke, Describing the elephant: The different faces of IT as
service, ACM Queue, 3(6):2629, 2005.
12.
M. P. Papazoglou and W.-J. van den Heuvel, Service oriented architectures:
Approaches, technologies and research issues, The VLDB Journal, 16:389415, 2007.
13.
H. Kreger, Fulﬁlling the Web services promise, Communications of the ACM,
46(6):29, 2003.
14.
B. Blau, D. Neumann, C. Weinhardt, and S. Lamparter, Planning and pricing of
service mashups, in Proceedings of the 2008 10th IEEE Conference on E-Commerce
Technology and the Fifth IEEE Conference on Enterprise Computing, E-Commerce
and E-Services, Crystal City, Washington, DC, 2008, pp.1926.
15.
C. Catlett, The philosophy of TeraGrid: Building an open, extensible, distributed
TeraScale facility, in Proceedings of 2nd IEEE/ACM International Symposium on
Cluster Computing and the Grid, Berlin, Germany, 2002, p. 8.
16.
F. Gagliardi, B. Jones, F. Grey, M. E. Begin, and M. Heikkurinen, Building an
infrastructure for scientiﬁc grid computing: Status and goals of the EGEE project,
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and
Engineering Sciences, 363(1833):1729, 2005.
17.
J. Broberg, S. Venugopal, and R. Buyya, Market-oriented Grid and utility
computing: The state-of-the-art and future directions, Journal of Grid Computing,
6:255276, 2008.
18.
I. Foster, Globus toolkit version 4: Software for service-oriented systems, Journal
of Computer Science and Technology, 21(513520), 2006.
19.
R. Buyya and S. Venugopal, Market oriented computing and global Grids: An
introduction, in Market Oriented Grid and Utility Computing, R. Buyya and
K. Bubendorfer (eds.), John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ, 2009, pp. 2444.
20.
K. Keahey, I. Foster, T. Freeman, and X. Zhang, Virtual workspaces: Achieving
quality of service and quality of life in the grid, Scientiﬁc Programming,
13(4):265275, 2005.
21.
R. P. Goldberg, Survey of virtual machine research, IEEE Computer, 7(6):3445,
1974.
38
INTRODUCTION TO CLOUD COMPUTING


22.
R. Uhlig et al., Intel virtualization technology, IEEE Computer, 38(5):4856, 2005.
23.
P. Barham et al., Xen and the art of virtualization, in Proceedings of 19th ACM
Symposium on Operation Systems Principles, New York, 2003, pp. 164177.
24.
VMWare Inc., VMWare, http://www.vmware.com, 22/4/2010.
25.
Xen.org Community, http://www.xen.org, 22/4/2010.
26.
Citrix Systems Inc., XenServer, http://www.citrix.com/XenServer, 22/4/2010.
27.
Oracle Corp., Oracle VM, http://www.oracle.com/technology/products/vm, 24/4/2010.
28.
KVM Project, Kernel based virtual machine, http://www.linux-kvm.org, 22/4/2010.
29.
A. Kivity, Y. Kamay, D. Laor, U. Lublin, and A. Liguori, KVM: The Linux
virtual machine monitor, in Proceedings of the Linux Symposium, Ottawa, Canada,
2007, p. 225.
30.
VMWare Inc., VMWare Virtual Appliance Marketplace, http://www.vmware.com/
appliances, 22/4/2010.
31.
Amazon Web Services Developer Community, Amazon Machine Images, http://
developer.amazonwebservices.com/connect/kbcategory.jspa?categoryID5 171, 22/4/2010.
32.
Distributed Management Task Force Inc, Open Virtualization Format, Speciﬁca-
tion DSP0243 Version 1.0.0, 2009.
33.
J. Matthews, T. Garﬁnkel, C. Hoff, and J. Wheeler, Virtual machine contracts for
datacenter and cloud computing environments, in Proceedings of the 1st Workshop
on Automated Control for Datacenters and Clouds, 2009, pp. 2530.
34.
International Business Machines Corp., An architectural blueprint for autonomic
computing, White Paper Fourth Edition, 2006.
35.
M. C. Huebscher and J. A. McCann, A survey of autonomic computing—degrees,
models, and applications, ACM Computing Surveys, 40:128, 2008.
36.
VMWare
Inc.,
VMware
vSphere,
http://www.vmware.com/products/vsphere/,
22/4/2010.
37.
L. Youseff, M. Butrico, and D. Da Silva, Toward a uniﬁed ontology of cloud
computing, in Proceedings of the 2008 Grid Computing Environments Workshop,
2008, pp. 110.
38.
R. Buyya, S. Pandey, and C. Vecchiola, Cloudbus toolkit for market-oriented
cloud computing, in Proceedings 1st International Conference on Cloud Computing
(CloudCom 09), Beijing, 2009, pp. 327.
39.
D. Nurmi, R. Wolski, C. Grzegorczyk, G. Obertelli, S. Soman, L. Youseff, and D.
Zagorodnov, The Eucalyptus open-source cloud-computing system, in Proceedings
of IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster Computing and the Grid
(CCGrid 2009), Shanghai, China, pp. 124131, University of California, Santa
Barbara. (2009, Sep.) Eucalyptus [online]. http://open.eucalyptus.com.
40.
Appistry Inc., Cloud Platforms vs. Cloud Infrastructure, White Paper, 2009.
41.
B. Hayes, Cloud computing, Communications of the ACM, 51:911, 2008.
42.
P. T. Jaeger, J. Lin, J. M. Grimes, and S. N. Simmons, Where is the cloud?
Geography, economics, environment, and jurisdiction in cloud computing, First
Monday, 14(45): 2009.
43.
VMWare Inc., VMware vSphere, the First Cloud Operating, White Paper, 2009.
44.
Platform Computing, Platform ISF Datasheet, White Paper, 2009.
REFERENCES
39


45.
M. D. de Assuncao, A. di Costanzo, and R. Buyya, Evaluating the costbeneﬁt of
using cloud computing to extend the capacity of clusters, in Proceedings of the 18th
ACM International Symposium on High Performance Distributed Computing
(HPDC 2009), Munich, Germany, 2009, pp. 141150.
46.
D. Amrhein, Websphere Journal, http://websphere.sys-con.com/node/1029500,
22/4/2010.
47.
Libvirt: The Virtualization API, Terminology and Goals, http://libvirt.org/goals.
html, 22/4/2010.
48.
A. Singh, M. Korupolu, and D. Mohapatra, Server-storage virtualization: Inte-
gration and load balancing in data centers, in Proceedings of the 2008 ACM/IEEE
Conference on Supercomputing, 2008, pp. 112.
49.
R. Perlman, Interconnections: Bridges, Routers, Switches, and Internetworking
Protocols, Addison-Wesley Longman, Boston, MA, 1999.
50.
A. S. Tanenbaum, Computer Networks, Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2002.
51.
D. Gmach, J. Rolia, L. Cherkasova, and A. Kemper, Capacity management and
demand prediction for next generation data centers, in Proceedings of IEEE
International Conference on Web Services, 2007, pp. 43—50.
52.
A. Verma, P. Ahuja, and A. Neogi, pMapper: Power and migration cost aware
application placement in virtualized systems, in Proceedings of the 9th ACM/IFIP/
USENIX International Conference on Middleware, 2008, pp. 243—264.
53.
K. Keahey and T. Freeman, Contextualization: Providing one-click virtual
clusters, in Proceedings of IEEE Fourth International Conference on eScience,
2008, pp. 301—308.
54.
B. Sotomayor, K. Keahey, and I. Foster, Combining batch execution and leasing
using virtual machines, in Proceedings of the 17th International Symposium on High
Performance Distributed Computing, 2008, pp. 87—96.
55.
B. Sotomayor, R. Montero, I. M. Llorente, and I. Foster, Capacity leasing in cloud
systems using the opennebula engine, Cloud Computing and Applications, 2008.
56.
S. Venugopal, J. Broberg, and R. Buyya, OpenPEX: An open provisioning and
EXecution system for virtual machines, in Proceedings of the 17th International
Conference on Advanced Computing and Communications (ADCOM 2009), Ben-
galuru, India, 2009.
57.
VMWare Inc., VMware High Availability (HA), http://www.vmware.com/products/
high-availability/index.html, 22/4/2010.
58.
Citrix Systems Inc., The three levels of high availability—Balancing priorities and
cost, White Paper, 2008.
59.
VMWare Inc., VMWare vStorage APIs for Data Protection, http://www.vmware.
com/products/vstorage-apis-for-data-protection, 22/4/2010.
60.
H. E. Schaffer et al., NCSUs Virtual Computing Lab: A cloud computing solution,
Computer, 42:9497, 2009.
61.
North Carolina State University, Virtual Computing Lab (VCL), http://vcl.ncsu.
edu, 22/4/2010.
62.
3tera Inc., AppLogic—Grid Operating System for Web Applications, http://
www.3tera.com/AppLogic, 22/4/2010.
63.
3Tera Inc., The AppLogic Grid Operating System, White Paper, 2006.
40
INTRODUCTION TO CLOUD COMPUTING


64.
Citrix Systems Inc., Citrix essentials for Hyper-V, http://www.citrix.com/ehv,
22/4/2010.
65.
Distributed Systems Architecture Group, OpenNebula: The open source toolkit
for cloud computing, http://www.opennebula.org, 22/4/2010.
66.
University of Chicago, Haizea—An open source VM-based lease manager, http://
haizea.cs.uchicago.edu, 22/4/2010.
67.
Red Hat’s Emerging Technology group, oVirt, http://ovirt.org, 22/4/2010.
68.
Platform
Computing
Corporation,
Platform
ISF.
http://www.platform.com/
Products/platform-isf, 22/4/2010.
69.
Platform
Computing,
Platform
VM
Orchestrator,
http://www.platform.com/
Products/platform-vm-orchestrator, 22/4/2010.
70.
Amazon Inc., Amazon Web Services, http://www.amazon.com, 22/4/2010.
71.
F. Chang et al., Bigtable: A distributed storage system for structured data, in
Proceedings of the 7th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
Implementation (OSDI’06), 2006, pp. 205218.
72.
C. Vecchiola, X. Chu, and R. Buyya, Aneka: A software platform for .NET-based
cloud computing, in High Speed and Large Scale Scientiﬁc Computing, W.
Gentzsch, L. Grandinetti, and G. Joubert (eds.), IOS Press, Amsterdam, Nether-
lands, 2009, pp. 267295.
73.
W. Voorsluys, J. Broberg, S. Venugopal, and R. Buyya, Cost of virtual machine
live migration in clouds: A performance evaluation, in Proceedings 1st International
Conference on Cloud Computing, Beijing, 2009, pp. 254265.
74.
D. T. Meyer et al., Parallax: Virtual disks for virtual machines, in Proceedings of
the 3rd ACM SIGOPS/EuroSys European Conference on Computer Systems, 2008,
pp. 4154.
REFERENCES
41


CHAPTER 2
MIGRATING INTO A CLOUD
T. S. MOHAN
2.1
INTRODUCTION
The promise of cloud computing has raised the IT expectations of small and
medium enterprises beyond measure. Large companies are deeply debating it.
Cloud computing is a disruptive model of IT whose innovation is part
technology and part business model—in short a “disruptive techno-commercial
model” of IT. This tutorial chapter focuses on the key issues and associated
dilemmas faced by decision makers, architects, and systems managers in trying
to understand and leverage cloud computing for their IT needs. Questions
asked and discussed in this chapter include: when and how to migrate one’s
application into a cloud; what part or component of the IT application to
migrate into a cloud and what not to migrate into a cloud; what kind of
customers really beneﬁt from migrating their IT into the cloud; and so on. We
describe the key factors underlying each of the above questions and share a
Seven-Step Model of Migration into the Cloud.
Cloud computing has been a hotly debated and discussed topic amongst IT
professionals and researchers both in the industry and in academia. There are
intense discussions on several blogs, in Web sites, and in several research efforts
[14]. This also resulted in several entrepreneurial efforts to help leverage
and migrate into the cloud given the myriad issues, challenges, beneﬁts, and
limitations and lack of comprehensive understanding of what cloud computing
can do. On the one hand, there were these large cloud computing IT vendors
like Google, Amazon, and Microsoft, who had started offering cloud comput-
ing services on what seemed like a demonstration and trial basis though not
explicitly mentioned. They were charging users fees that in certain contexts
demonstrated very attractive pricing models. It demonstrated that cloud
computing per se was for real and that the “techno-commerical disruptive
Cloud Computing: Principles and Paradigms,
Edited by Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg and
Andrzej Goscinski
Copyright r 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
43
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>


business model” was indeed giving a greater return on investment (ROI) than
traditional IT investment for a business. On the other hand, these initial cloud
computing offerings were premature. The cloud computing service vendors
were grappling real issues of distributed systems as well as business models and
had a number open engineering and research problems [2] that indicated in
multiple ways that the cloud computing services were yet to mature fully.
Several efforts have been made in the recent past to deﬁne the term “cloud
computing” and many have not been able to provide a comprehensive one [2, 5,
6]. This has been more challenging given the scorching pace of the technological
advances as well as the newer business model formulations for the cloud services
being offered. We propose the following deﬁnition of cloud computing: “It is a
techno-business disruptive model of using distributed large-scale data centers either
private or public or hybrid offering customers a scalable virtualized infrastructure
or an abstracted set of services qualiﬁed by service-level agreements (SLAs) and
charged only by the abstracted IT resources consumed.” Most enterprises today
are powered by captive data centers. In most large or small enterprises today, IT
is the backbone of their operations. Invariably for these large enterprises, their
data centers are distributed across various geographies. They comprise systems
and software that span several generations of products sold by a variety of IT
vendors. In order to meet varying loads, most of these data centers are
provisioned with capacity beyond the peak loads experienced. If the enterprise
is in a seasonal or cyclical business, then the load variation would be signiﬁcant.
Thus what is observed generally is that the provisioned capacity of IT resources
is several times the average demand. This is indicative of signiﬁcant degree of idle
capacity. Many data center management teams have been continuously inno-
vating their management practices and technologies deployed to possibly
squeeze out the last possible usable computing resource cycle through appro-
priate programming, systems conﬁgurations, SLAs, and systems management.
Cloud computing turned attractive to them because they could pass on the
additional demand from their IT setups onto the cloud while paying only for
the usage and being unencumbered by the load of operations and management.
2.1.1
The Promise of the Cloud
Most users of cloud computing services offered by some of the large-scale data
centers are least bothered about the complexities of the underlying systems or
their functioning. More so given the heterogeneity of either the systems or the
software running on them. They were most impressed by the simplicity,
uniformity, and ease of use of the Cloud Computing Service abstractions. In
small and medium enterprises, cloud computing usage for all additional cyclical
IT needs has yielded substantial and signiﬁcant economic savings. Many such
success stories have been documented and discussed on the Internet. This
economics and the associated trade-offs, of leveraging the cloud computing
services, now popularly called “cloudonomics,” for satisfying enterprise’s
44
MIGRATING INTO A CLOUD


seasonal IT loads has become a topic of deep interest amongst IT managers and
technology architects.
As shown in Figure 2.1, the promise of the cloud both on the business front
(the attractive cloudonomics) and the technology front widely aided the CxOs
to spawn out several non-mission critical IT needs from the ambit of their
captive traditional data centers to the appropriate cloud service. Invariably,
these IT needs had some common features: They were typically Web-oriented;
they represented seasonal IT demands; they were amenable to parallel batch
processing; they were non-mission critical and therefore did not have high
security demands. They included scientiﬁc applications too [7]. Several small
and medium business enterprises, however, leveraged the cloud much beyond
the cautious user. Many startups opened their IT departments exclusively using
cloud services—very successfully and with high ROI. Having observed these
successes, several large enterprises have started successfully running pilots for
leveraging the cloud. Many large enterprises run SAP to manage their
operations. SAP itself is experimenting with running its suite of products:
SAP Business One as well as SAP Netweaver on Amazon cloud offerings.
Gartner, Forrester, and other industry research analysts predict that a sub-
stantially signiﬁcant percentage of the top enterprises in the world would have
migrated a majority of their IT needs to the cloud offerings by 2012, thereby
demonstrating the widespread impact and beneﬁts from cloud computing.
Indeed the promise of the cloud has been signiﬁcant in its impact.
2.1.2
The Cloud Service Offerings and Deployment Models
Cloud computing has been an attractive proposition both for the CFO and the
CTO of an enterprise primarily due its ease of usage. This has been achieved
by large data center service vendors or now better known as cloud service
vendors again primarily due to their scale of operations. Google,1 Amazon,2
Cloudonomics
• ‘Pay per use’ – Lower Cost Barriers
• On Demand Resources –Autoscaling
• Capex vs OPEX – No capital expenses (CAPEX) and only operational expenses OPEX.
• SLA driven operations – Much Lower TCO
• Attractive NFR support: Availability, Reliability
• ‘Infinite’ Elastic availability – Compute/Storage/Bandwidth
• Automatic Usage Monitoring and Metering
• Jobs/Tasks Virtualized and Transparently ‘Movable’
• Integration and interoperability ‘support’ for hybrid ops
• Transparently encapsulated & abstracted IT features.
Technology
FIGURE 2.1. The promise of the cloud computing services.
1 http://appengine.google.com
2 http://aws.amazon.com
2.1
INTRODUCTION
45


Microsoft,3 and a few others have been the key players apart from open source
Hadoop4 built around the Apache ecosystem. As shown in Figure 2.2, the cloud
service offerings from these vendors can broadly be classiﬁed into three major
streams: the Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), the Platform as a Service (PaaS),
and the Software as a Service (SaaS). While IT managers and system admin-
istrators preferred IaaS as offered by Amazon for many of their virtualized IT
needs, the programmers preferred PaaS offerings like Google AppEngine
(Java/Python programming) or Microsoft Azure (.Net programming). Users
of large-scale enterprise software invariably found that if they had been using
the cloud, it was because their usage of the speciﬁc software package was
available as a service—it was, in essence, a SaaS offering. Salesforce.com
was an exemplary SaaS offering on the Internet.
From a technology viewpoint, as of today, the IaaS type of cloud offerings
have been the most successful and widespread in usage. However, the potential
of PaaS has been high: All new cloud-oriented application development
initiatives are based on the PaaS model. The signiﬁcant impact of enterprises
leveraging IaaS and PaaS has been in the form of services whose usage is
representative of SaaS on the Cloud. Be it search (Google/Yahoo/Bing, etc.)
or email (Gmail/Yahoomail/Hotmail, etc.) or social networking (Facebook/
Twitter/Orkut, etc.), most users are unaware that much of their on-line
activities has been supported in one form or the other by the cloud.
The cloud application deployment and consumption was modeled at three
levels: the public cloud offerings from cloud vendors; the private cloud
initiatives within large enterprises; and the hybrid cloud initiatives that leverage
both the public cloud and the private cloud or managed services data centers.
IaaS
IT Folks
PaaS
Programmers
SaaS
Architects & Users
Public Clouds
• Abstract Compute/Storage/Bandwidth Resources
• Amazon Web Services[10,9] – EC2, S3, SDB, CDN, CloudWatch
• Abstracted Programming Platform with encapsulated infrastructure
• Google Apps Engine(Java/Python), Microsoft Azure, Aneka[13]
• Application with encapsulated infrastructure & platform
• Salesforce.com; Gmail; Yahoo Mail; Facebook; Twitter
Hybrid Clouds
Private Clouds
Cloud Application Deployment & Consumption Models
FIGURE 2.2. The cloud computing service offering and deployment models.
3 http://azure.microsoft.com
4 http://hadoop.apache.org
46
MIGRATING INTO A CLOUD


The IaaSoriented services offered abstracted (or virtualized and scalable)
hardware—like compute power or storage or bandwidth. For example, as seen
from its pricing tariffs webpage for 2009, Amazon5 offered six levels of
abstracted elastic cloud compute (EC2) server power: the “small-instance,”
“large-instance,” “extra-large instance,” “high-cpu instance,” “high-cpu med-
ium instance,” or “high-cpu extra-large instance.” Each of these are accom-
panied by appropriate RAM, storage, performance guarantees, and bandwidth
support. The PaaS offerings are focused on supporting programming platforms
whose runtime implicitly use’s cloud services offered by their respective
vendors. As of today, these highly vendor-locked PaaS technologies have
been leveraged to develop new applications by many startups. Compared to
IaaS offerings, applications riding on PaaS deliver better performance due to
the intrinsic cloud support for the programming platform. The SaaS on Cloud
offerings are focused on supporting large software package usage leveraging
cloud beneﬁts. Most users of these packages are invariably ignorant of the
underlying cloud support—in fact most, if not all, do not care. Indeed, a
signiﬁcant degree of the features of the software package invariably reﬂect the
support of the cloud computing platform under the hood. For example, in
gmail, users hardly bother about either the storage space taken up or whether
an email needs to be deleted or its storage location. Invariably these reﬂect the
cloud underneath, where storage (most do not know on which system it is) is
easily scalable or for that matter where it is stored or located.
2.1.3
Challenges in the Cloud
While the cloud service offerings present a simplistic view of IT in case of IaaS
or a simplistic view of programming in case PaaS or a simplistic view of
resources usage in case of SaaS, the underlying systems level support challenges
are huge and highly complex. These stem from the need to offer a uniformly
consistent and robustly simplistic view of computing while the underlying
systems are highly failure-prone, heterogeneous, resource hogging, and
exhibiting serious security shortcomings. As observed in Figure 2.3, the
promise of the cloud seems very similar to the typical distributed systems
properties that most would prefer to have. Invariably either in the IaaS or PaaS
or SaaS cloud services, one is proffered features that smack of full network
reliability; or having “instant” or “zero” network latency; or perhaps support-
ing “inﬁnite” bandwidth; and so on. But then robust distributed systems are
built while keeping mind that are these fallacies6 that must be studiously
avoided at design time as well as during implementations and deployments.
Cloud computing has the ironical role of projecting this idealized view of its
services while ensuring that the underlying systems are managed realistically. In
fact the challenges in implementing cloud computing services are plenty: Many
5 http://aws.amazon.com/ec2
6 http://blogs.sun.com/jag/resource/Fallacies.html
2.1
INTRODUCTION
47


of them are listed in Figure 2.3. Prime amongst these are the challenges of
security. The Cloud Security Alliance seeks to address many of these issues [8].
2.2
BROAD APPROACHES TO MIGRATING INTO THE CLOUD
Given that cloud computing is a “techno-business disruptive model” and is on
the top of the top 10 strategic technologies to watch for 2010 according to
Gartner,7 migrating into the cloud is poised to become a large-scale effort in
leveraging the cloud in several enterprises. “Cloudonomics” deals with the
economic rationale for leveraging the cloud and is central to the success of
cloud-based enterprise usage. At what IT costs—both short term and long
term—would one want to migrate into the cloud? While all capital expenses are
eliminated and only operational expenses incurred by leveraging the cloud,
does this satisfy all strategic parameters for enterprise IT? Does the total cost of
ownership (TCO) become signiﬁcantly less as compared to that incurred when
running one’s own private data center? Decision-makers, IT managers, and
software architects are faced with several dilemmas when planning for new
Enterprise IT initiatives.
2.2.1
Why Migrate?
There are economic and business reasons why an enterprise application can be
migrated into the cloud, and there are also a number of technological reasons.
Many of these efforts come up as initiatives in adoption of cloud technologies
in the enterprise, resulting in integration of enterprise applications running off
the captive data centers with the new ones that have been developed on the
cloud. Adoption of or integration with cloud computing services is a use case of
migration.
Distributed System Fallacies
and the Promise of the Cloud
Challenges in Cloud Technologies
Security
Performance Monitoring
Consistent & Robust Service abstractions
Meta Scheduling
Energy efficient load balancing
Scale management
SLA & QoS Architectures
Interoperability & Portability
Green IT
Full Network Reliability
Zero Network Latency
Infinite Bandwidth
Secure Network
No Topology changes
Centralized Administration
Zero Transport Costs
Homogeneous Networks & Systems
FIGURE 2.3. ‘Under the hood’ challenges of the cloud computing services implementations.
7 http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id51210613
48
MIGRATING INTO A CLOUD


At the core, migration of an application into the cloud can happen in one of
several ways: Either the application is clean and independent, so it runs as is; or
perhaps some degree of code needs to be modiﬁed and adapted; or the design
(and therefore the code) needs to be ﬁrst migrated into the cloud computing
service environment; or ﬁnally perhaps the migration results in the core
architecture being migrated for a cloud computing service setting, this resulting
in a new architecture being developed, along with the accompanying design and
code implementation. Or perhaps while the application is migrated as is, it is the
usage of the application that needs to be migrated and therefore adapted and
modiﬁed. In brief, migration can happen at one of the ﬁve levels of application,
code, design, architecture, and usage.
With due simpliﬁcation, the migration of an enterprise application is best
captured by the following:
P-P0
C 1 P0
l-P0
OFC 1 P0
l
where P is the application before migration running in captive data center, P0
C is
the application part after migration either into a (hybrid) cloud, P0
l is the part
of application being run in the captive local data center, and P0
OFC is the
application part optimized for cloud. If an enterprise application cannot be
migrated fully, it could result in some parts being run on the captive local data
center while the rest are being migrated into the cloud—essentially a case of a
hybrid cloud usage. However, when the entire application is migrated onto the
cloud, then P0
l is null. Indeed, the migration of the enterprise application P can
happen at the ﬁve levels of application, code, design, architecture, and usage. It
can be that the P0
C migration happens at any of the ﬁve levels without any P0
l
component. Compound this with the kind of cloud computing service offering
being applied—the IaaS model or PaaS or SaaS model—and we have a variety
of migration use cases that need to be thought through thoroughly by the
migration architects. To capture this situation succinctly, on enumeration, we
have the following migration scenario use-case numbers: For migrating into an
IaaS offering, there are 30 use-case scenarios. For migrating into a PaaS
offering, there are 20 use-case scenarios. For migrating into a SaaS offering, it
is purely a case of migration of usage, with no accompanying enterprise
application migration—like the case of migrating from an existing local ERP
system to SAP already being offered on a cloud. Of course, for each of these
migration use-case scenarios, detailed approaches exist while for many
commonly applicable scenarios, enterprises have consolidated their migration
strategy best practices. In fact, the migration industry thrives on these custom
and proprietary best practices. Many of these best practices are specialized at
the level of the components of an enterprise application—like migrating
application servers or the enterprise databases.
Cloudonomics. Invariably, migrating into the cloud is driven by economic
reasons of cost cutting in both the IT capital expenses (Capex) as well as
2.2
BROAD APPROACHES TO MIGRATING INTO THE CLOUD
49


operational expenses (Opex). There are both the short-term beneﬁts of oppor-
tunistic migration to offset seasonal and highly variable IT loads as well as the
long-term beneﬁts to leverage the cloud. For the long-term sustained usage, as of
2009, several impediments and shortcomings of the cloud computing services
need to be addressed.
At the core of the cloudonomics, as articulated in Ambrust et al. [2], is the
expression of when a migration can be economically feasible or tenable. If
the average costs of using an enterprise application on a cloud is substantially
lower than the costs of using it in one’s captive data center and if the cost of
migration does not add to the burden on ROI, then the case for migration into
the cloud is strong.
Apart from these costs, other factors that play a major role in the cloudo-
nomics of migration are the licensing issues (for perhaps parts of the enterprise
application), the SLA compliances, and the pricing of the cloud service offerings.
Most cloud service vendors, at a broad level, have tariffs for the kind of elastic
compute, the elastic storage, or the elastic bandwidth. Of course these pricing
tariffs can be variable too, and therefore the cloudonomics of migration should
be soundly meaningful accommodating the pricing variability.
2.2.2
Deciding on the Cloud Migration
In fact, several proof of concepts and prototypes of the enterprise application
are experimented on the cloud to take help in making a sound decision on
migrating into the cloud. Post migration, the ROI on the migration should be
positive for a broad range of pricing variability. Arriving at a decision for
undertaking migration demands that either the compelling factors be clearly
understood or the pragmatic approach of consulting a group of experts be
constituted. In the latter case, much like software estimation, one applies Wide-
Band Delphi Techniques [9] to make decisions. We use the following technique:
A questionnaire with several classes of key questions that impact the IT due to
the migration of the enterprise application is posed to a select audience chosen
for their technology and business expertise. Assume that there are M such
classes. Each class of questions is assigned a certain relative weightage Bi in the
context of the entire questionnaire. Assume that in the M classes of questions,
there was a class with a maximum of N questions. We can then model the
weightage-based decision making as M 3 N weightage matrix as follows:
Cl #
X
M
i51
Bi
X
N
j51
AijXij
 
!
# Ch
where Cl is the lower weightage threshold and Ch is the higher weightage
threshold while Aij is the speciﬁc constant assigned for a question and Xij is the
fraction between 0 and 1 that represents the degree to which that answer to
the question is relevant and applicable. Since all except one class of questions
do not have all N questions, the corresponding has a null value. The lower
50
MIGRATING INTO A CLOUD


and higher thresholds are deﬁned to rule out trivial cases of migration. A
simpliﬁed variant of this method can be presented as a balanced scorecard-
oriented decision making. An example of that approach to the adoption of
cloud is found in Dargha [10].
2.3
THE SEVEN-STEP MODEL OF MIGRATION INTO A CLOUD
Typically migration initiatives into the cloud are implemented in phases or in
stages. A structured and process-oriented approach to migration into a cloud has
several advantages of capturing within itself the best practices of many migration
projects. While migration has been a difﬁcult and vague subject—of not much
interest to the academics and left to the industry practitioners—not many efforts
across the industry have been put in to consolidate what has been found to be
both a top revenue earner and a long standing customer pain. After due study
and practice, we share the Seven-Step Model of Migration into the Cloud as part
of our efforts in understanding and leveraging the cloud computing service
offerings in the enterprise context. In a succinct way, Figure 2.4 captures the
essence of the steps in the model of migration into the cloud, while Figure 2.5
captures the iterative process of the seven-step migration into the cloud.
Cloud migration assessments comprise assessments to understand the issues
involved in the speciﬁc case of migration at the application level or the code, the
design, the architecture, or usage levels. In addition, migration assessments
are done for the tools being used, the test cases as well as conﬁgurations,
functionalities, and NFRs of the enterprise application. This results in a
meaningful formulation of a comprehensive migration strategy. The ﬁrst step
of the iterative process of the seven-step model of migration is basically at the
assessment level. Proof of concepts or prototypes for various approaches to
the migration along with the leveraging of pricing parameters enables one
to make appropriate assessments.
These assessments are about the cost of migration as well as about the ROI
that can be achieved in the case of production version. The next process step is in
isolating all systemic and environmental dependencies of the enterprise
1. Conduct Cloud Migration Assessments
2. Isolate the Dependencies
3. Map the Messaging & Environment
4. Re-architect & Implement the lost Functionalities
5. Leverage Cloud Functionalities & Features
6. Test the Migration
7. Iterate and Optimize
FIGURE 2.4. The Seven-Step Model of Migration into the Cloud. (Source: Infosys
Research.)
2.3
THE SEVEN-STEP MODEL OF MIGRATION INTO A CLOUD
51


application components within the captive data center. This, in turn, yields
a picture of the level of complexity of the migration. After isolation is complete,
one then goes about generating the mapping constructs between what shall
possibly remain in the local captive data center and what goes onto the cloud.
Perhaps a substantial part of the enterprise application needs to be re-
architected, redesigned, and reimplemented on the cloud. This gets in just about
the functionality of the original enterprise application. Due to this migration, it
is possible perhaps that some functionality is lost. In the next process step we
leverage the intrinsic features of the cloud computing service to augment our
enterprise application in its own small ways. Having done the augmentation, we
validate and test the new form of the enterprise application with an extensive
test suite that comprises testing the components of the enterprise application on
the cloud as well. These test results could be positive or mixed. In the latter case,
we iterate and optimize as appropriate. After several such optimizing iterations,
the migration is deemed successful. Our best practices indicate that it is best to
iterate through this Seven-Step Model process for optimizing and ensuring that
the migration into the cloud is both robust and comprehensive. Figure 2.6
captures the typical components of the best practices accumulated in the
practice of the Seven-Step Model of Migration into the Cloud. Though not
comprehensive in enumeration, it is representative.
START
END
The Iterative Seven Step
Migration Model
Assess
Optimize
Test
Map
Augment
Re-
architect
Isolate
FIGURE 2.5. The iterative Seven-step Model of Migration into the Cloud. (Source:
Infosys Research.)
52
MIGRATING INTO A CLOUD


Compared with the typical approach8 to migration into the Amazon AWS,
our Seven-step model is more generic, versatile, and comprehensive. The typical
migration into the Amazon AWS is a phased over several steps. It is about six
steps as discussed in several white papers in the Amazon website and is as
follows: The ﬁrst phase is the cloud migration assessment phase wherein
dependencies are isolated and strategies worked out to handle these dependen-
cies. The next phase is in trying out proof of concepts to build a reference
migration architecture. The third phase is the data migration phase wherein
database data segmentation and cleansing is completed. This phase also tries to
leverage the various cloud storage options as best suited. The fourth phase
comprises the application migration wherein either a “forklift strategy” of
migrating the key enterprise application along with its dependencies (other
applications) into the cloud is pursued. Or perhaps using the “hybrid migration
strategy,” the critical parts of the enterprise application are retained in the local
captive data center while noncritical parts are moved into the cloud. The ﬁfth
phase comprises leveraging the various Amazon AWS features like elasticity,
autoscaling, cloud storage, and so on. Finally in the sixth phase, the migration
is optimized for the cloud. These phases are representative of how typical IT
staff would like to migrate an enterprise application without touching its
innards but only perhaps at the level of conﬁgurations—this perfectly matches
with the typical IaaS cloud computing offerings. However, this is just a subset
of our Seven-step Migration Model and is very speciﬁc and proprietary to
Amazon cloud offering.
2.3.1
Migration Risks and Mitigation
The biggest challenge to any cloud migration project is how effectively the
migration risks are identiﬁed and mitigated. In the Seven-Step Model of
Migration into the Cloud, the process step of testing and validating includes
Assess
• Cloudonomics
• Migration
 Costs
• Recurring
 Costs
• Database data
 segmentation
• Database
 Migration
• Functionality
 migration
• NFR Support
Isolate
Map
Re-Architect
Augment
Test
Optimize
• Runtime
 Environment
• Licensing
• Libraries
 Dependency
• Applications
 Dependency
• Latencies
 Bottlenecks
• Performance
 bottlenecks
• Architectural
 Dependencies
• Messages
 mapping:
 marshalling &
 de-marshalling
• Mapping
 Environments
• Mapping
 libraries &
 runtime
 approximations
• Approximate
 lost
 functionality
 using cloud
 runtime
 support API
• New
 Usecases
• Analysis
• Design
• Exploit
 additional
 cloud features
• Seek Low-cost
 augmentations
• Autoscaling
• Storage
• Bandwidth
• Security
• Optimize–
 rework and
 iterate
• Significantly
 satisfy
 cloudonomics
 of migration
• Optimize
 compliance
 with standards
 and
 governance
• Deliver best
 migration ROI
• Develop
 roadmap for
 leveraging new
 cloud features
• Augment Test
 Cases and
 Test
 Automation
• Run Proof-of-
 Concepts
• Test Migration
 strategy
• Test new
 testcases due
 to cloud
 augmentation
• Test for
 Production
 Loads
FIGURE 2.6. Some details of the iterative Seven-Step Model of Migration into the
Cloud.
8 http://aws.amazon.com
2.3
THE SEVEN-STEP MODEL OF MIGRATION INTO A CLOUD
53


efforts to identify the key migration risks. In the optimization step, we address
various approaches to mitigate the identiﬁed migration risks.
Migration risks for migrating into the cloud fall under two broad categories:
the general migration risks and the security-related migration risks. In the
former we address several issues including performance monitoring and
tuning—essentially identifying all possible production level deviants; the
business continuity and disaster recovery in the world of cloud computing
service; the compliance with standards and governance issues; the IP and
licensing issues; the quality of service (QoS) parameters as well as the
corresponding SLAs committed to; the ownership, transfer, and storage of
data in the application; the portability and interoperability issues which could
help mitigate potential vendor lock-ins; the issues that result in trivializing and
noncomprehending the complexities of migration that results in migration
failure and loss of senior management’s business conﬁdence in these efforts.
On the security front, the cloud migration risks are plenty—as addressed in
the guideline document published by the Cloud Security Alliance [8]. Issues
include security at various levels of the enterprise application as applicable on
the cloud in addition to issues of trust and issues of privacy. There are several
legal compliances that a migration strategy and implementation has to fulﬁll,
including obtaining the right execution logs as well as retaining the rights to all
audit trails at a detailed level—which currently may not be fully available. On
matters of governance, there are several shortcomings in the current cloud
computing service vendors. Matters of multi-tenancy and the impact of IT data
leakage in the cloud computing environments is acknowledged; however, the
robustness of the solutions to prevent it is not fully validated. Key aspects of
vulnerability management and incident responses quality are yet to be
supported in a substantial way by the cloud service vendors. Finally there
are issues of consistent identity management as well. These and several of the
issues are discussed in Section 2.1. Issues and challenges listed in Figure 2.3
continue to be the persistent research and engineering challenges in coming up
with appropriate cloud computing implementations.
2.4
CONCLUSIONS
While migrating into a cloud has a lot of challenges, many migration projects fail
to fully comprehend the issues at stake—with the key sponsors and management
either trivializing it or committing to migrating a piece of code and/or data into
the cloud. There are signiﬁcant opportunities and success factors for a well-
designed cloud migration strategy leveraging the Seven-Step Model of Migration
into the Cloud. Primary amongst them is a comprehensive understanding of the
cloudonomics of the migration as well as the underlying technical challenges.
Developing the best practices in migrating to the cloud is unique to every
class of enterprise applications and unique to every corporate practice group.
Some of the key best practices include designing the migration as well as the
54
MIGRATING INTO A CLOUD


new application architecture or design or code for failures when in reality most
assume that cloud computing service environments are failsafe. In fact most
cloud computing data centers use commodity hardware and are routinely prone
to failure. Approaches not reﬂecting this reality results in several performance
penalties. Another best practice is the application and enforcement of loose-
coupling between various parts of the target enterprise application. A key best
practice has to been to build security at every level and layer of the migration.
Finally the most important of the best practices has been to fully leverage the
cloud computing service features while not being constrained by the baggage
carried by the enterprise application in its traditional deployment in the captive
data centers. Migrating into a cloud is a nontrivial activity. It is challenging
given the complexity of comprehending the various factors involved for a
successful migration. The proposed Seven-Step Model of Migration into the
cloud helps structure and organize one’s efforts in putting together a plan of
action and process to successful complete the migration without problems. Of
course best practices are accumulated through migration project executions,
and the seven-step model of migration is reﬂective of this.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author sincerely thanks S. V. Subrahmanya as well as the members of
E-Com Research Labs, E&R, and Infosys for all the help and support.
REFERENCES
1.
J. Broberg, S. Venugopal, and R. Buyya, Market-oriented Grids and utility
computing: The state-of-the-art and future directions, Journal of Grid Computing,
6(3):255276, 2008.
2.
M. Ambrust, A. Fox, R. Grifﬁth, A. D. Joseph, R. Katz, A. Konwinski, G. Lee, D.
Patterson, A. Rabkin, I. Stoica, and M. Zaharia, Above the Clouds: A Berkeley
View of Cloud Computing, UC Berkeley RAD Systems Labs, Feb 2009.
3.
G. Reese, Cloud Application Architectures: Building Applications and Infrastructure
in the Cloud, O’Reilly, April 2007.
4.
R. Buyya, C. S. Yeo, and S. Venugopal, Market-oriented cloud computing: Vision,
hype, and reality for delivering IT Services as Computing Utilities, in Proceedings
of the 10th IEEE International Conference on High Performance Computing and
Communications, September 2527, 2008, pp. 513 Dalian, China.
5.
Cloud Deﬁnitions: NIST, Gartner, Forrester in Cloud enterprise, August 2009. (Also
available at: http://cloudenterprise.info/2009/08/04/cloud-deﬁnitions-nist-gartner-
forrester/)
6.
T. Velte, A. Velte, and R. Elsenpeter, Cloud Computing, A Practical Approach,
McGraw-Hill Computing, New York, 2009.
REFERENCES
55


7.
C. Vecchiola, S. Pandey, and R. Buyya, High-performance cloud computing: A
view of scientiﬁc applications, in Proceedings of the 10th International Symposium
on Pervasive Systems, Algorithms and Networks (I-SPAN 2009, IEEE CS Press,
USA), Kaohsiung, Taiwan, December 1416, 2009.
8.
Security Guidance for Critical Areas of Focus in Cloud Computing, The
Cloud Security Alliance April/November 2009. (Also available at: http://www.
cloudsecurityalliance.org/csaguide.pdf )
9.
A. Stellman and J. Greene, Applied Software Project Management, O’Reilly Media.
10.
R. Dargha, Cloud Computing—Key Considerations for Adoption, Infosys Technol-
ogies Whitepaper. 2009. (Also available at http://www.infosys.com/cloud-computing/
white-papers/cloud-computing.pdf)
11.
C. Keene, I. Poddar, J. Nicke, and U. Budink, Cloud Quick Start—A Roadmap
for Adopting Cloud Computing—IBM, WaveMaker and Rightscale, WaveMaker
Software Inc. Whitepaper, November 2009. (Also available at: http://www.
wavemaker.com/ibm-quickstart.pdf)
12.
A. Dubey, J. Mohiuddin, and A. Baijal, The Emerging Platform Wars in Enterprise
Software, A McKinsey & Company Whitepaper, April 2008. (Available at http://
www.mckinsey.com/clientservice/hightech/pdfs/Emerging_Platform_Wars.pdf )
13.
C. Vecchiola, X. Chu, and R. Buyya, Aneka: A software platform for .NET-based
Cloud computing, High Performance & Large Scale Computing, Advances in
Parallel Computing, W. Gentzsch, L. Grandinetti, and G. Joubert (eds.), IOS
Press, 2009.
14.
SMART—The Service Oriented Migration and Reuse Technique. Software
Engineering Institute Tech Report: CMU/SEI-2005-TN-029.
56
MIGRATING INTO A CLOUD


CHAPTER 3
ENRICHING THE ‘INTEGRATION
AS A SERVICE’ PARADIGM FOR
THE CLOUD ERA
PETHURU RAJ
3.1
AN INTRODUCTION
The trend-setting cloud paradigm actually represents the cool conglomeration
of a number of proven and promising Web and enterprise technologies.
Though the cloud idea is not conceptually new, practically it has brought in
myriad tectonic shifts for the whole information and communication technol-
ogy (ICT) industry. The cloud concepts have progressively and perceptibly
impacted the IT and business domains on several critical aspects. The cloud
computing has brought in series of novelty-packed deployment, delivery,
consumption and pricing models whereas the service orientation prescribes a
much simpler application design mechanism. The noteworthy contribution of
the much-discoursed and deliberated cloud computing is the faster realization
and proliferation of dynamic, converged, adaptive, on-demand, and online
compute infrastructures, which are the key requirement for the future IT. The
delightful distinctions here are that clouds guarantee most of the non-function
requirements (Quality of Service (QoS) attributes) such as availability, high
performance, on-demand scalability/elasticity, affordability, global-scale ac-
cessibility and usability, energy efﬁciency etc.
Having
understood
the
exceptional
properties
of
cloud
infrastruct-
ures (hereafter will be described as just clouds), most of the global enterprises
(small, medium and even large) are steadily moving their IT offerings such as
business services and applications to clouds. This transition will facilitate a
Cloud Computing: Principles and Paradigms,
Edited by Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg and
Andrzej Goscinski
Copyright r 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
57


higher and deeper reach and richness in application delivery and consumability.
Product vendors having found that the cloud style is a unique proposition are
moving their platforms, databases, and middleware to clouds. Cloud Infra-
structure providers are establishing cloud centers to host a variety of ICT
services and platforms of worldwide individuals, innovators, and institutions.
Cloud service providers (CSPs) are very aggressive in experimenting and
embracing the cool cloud ideas and today every business and technical services
are being hosted in clouds to be delivered to global customers, clients and
consumers over the Internet communication infrastructure. For example,
security as a service (SaaS) is a prominent cloud-hosted security service that
can be subscribed by a spectrum of users of any connected device and the users
just pay for the exact amount or time of usage. In a nutshell, on-premise and
local applications are becoming online, remote, hosted, on-demand and off-
premise applications. With the unprecedented advertisement, articulation and
adoption of cloud concepts, the cloud movement is picking up fast as per
leading market research reports. Besides the modernization of legacy applica-
tions and positing the updated and upgraded in clouds, fresh applications
are being implemented and deployed on clouds to be delivered to millions
of global users simultaneously affordably. It is hence clear that a number of
strategic and signiﬁcant movements happen silently in the hot ﬁeld of cloud
computing.
All these portend and predict that there is a new dimension to the integration
scenario. Hitherto enterprise data and applications are being linked up via one
or more standards-compliant integration platforms, brokers, engines, and
containers within the corporate intranet. Business-to-business (B2B) integra-
tion is being attended via special data formats, message templates, and
networks and even via the Internet. Enterprises consistently expand their
operations to several parts of the world as they establish special partnerships
with their partners or buy other companies in different geographies for
enhancing the product and service portfolios. Business applications are ﬁnding
their new residence in clouds. However most of the conﬁdential and corporate
data are still being maintained in enterprise servers for security reasons. The
integration task gets just bigger with the addition of the cloud space and
the integration complexity is getting murkier. Hence it is logical to take the
integration middleware to clouds to simplify and streamline the enterprise-to-
enterprise
(E2E),
enterprise-to-cloud
(E2C)
and
cloud-to-cloud
(C2C)
integration.
In this chapter, we want you to walk through how cloud paradigm impacts
the integration scene. That is, how cloud applications are being integrated with
both enterprise as well as other cloud applications. Similarly how applications
hosted in distributed clouds can ﬁnd on another and share their functionality is
also being given its share of attention. We have visualised and written about a
few important integration scenarios wherein cloud-based middleware excep-
tionally contributes for simplifying and streamlining the increasingly complex
integration goal. It is all about how integration becomes a cloud service.
58
ENRICHING THE ‘INTEGRATION AS A SERVICE’ PARADIGM FOR THE CLOUD ERA


3.2
THE ONSET OF KNOWLEDGE ERA
Having started its innings as the greatest business-enabler, today IT is tending
towards the signiﬁcant factor and the facilitator of every aspect of human lives.
Path-breaking and people-centric technologies (miniaturization, virtualization,
federation, composition, collaboration, etc.) are emerging and are being
experimented, expounded, and established in order to empower the profes-
sional and the personal IT to be smart, simple, supple and sensitive towards
users’ situational needs and to signiﬁcantly enhance peoples’ comfort, care,
convenience and choice. Novel computing paradigms (grid, on-demand,
service, cloud, etc.) erupt and evolve relentlessly to be greatly and gracefully
impactful and insightful. In the monolithic mainframe era, one centralized and
large system performed millions of operations to respond to thousands of users
(one-to-many), today everyone has his own compute machine (one-to-one), and
tomorrow a multitude of smart objects and electronic devices (nomadic,
wearable, portable, implantable etc.) will seamlessly and spontaneously co-
exist, corroborate, correlate, and coordinate with one another dynamically with
dexterity to understand one or more users’ needs, conceive, construct, and
deliver them at right time at right place (many-to-one). Anytime anywhere
computing tends towards everywhere, every time and everything computing.
Ambient intelligence (AmI) is the newest buzzword today with ambient
sensing, networking, perception, decision-making and actuation technologies.
Multimedia and multimodal technologies are ﬂourishing in order to be make
human interaction more friendly and fruitful. Dynamic, virtualized and
autonomic infrastructures, ﬂexible, integrated and lean processes, constructive
and contributive building-blocks (service, model, composite, agent, aspect etc.),
slim and sleek devices and appliances, smart objects empowered by invisible
tags and stickers, natural interfaces, ad-hoc and situational networking
capabilities all combine adaptively together to accomplish the grandiose goals
of the forthcoming ambient intelligence days and decades. In short, IT-
sponsored and splurged smartness in every facet of our living in this world is
the vision. Software engineering is on the right track with the maturity of
service orientation concepts and software as a service (SaaS) model. Clouds
chip in mightily in realizing the much-acclaimed knowledge era. Technologies
form a dynamic cluster in real-time in order to contribute immensely and
immeasurably for all the existing, evolving and exotic expectations of people.
3.3
THE EVOLUTION OF SaaS
SaaS paradigm is on fast track due to its innate powers and potentials.
Executives, entrepreneurs, and end-users are ecstatic about the tactic as well
as strategic success of the emerging and evolving SaaS paradigm. A number of
positive and progressive developments started to grip this model. Newer
resources and activities are being consistently readied to be delivered as a
3.3
THE EVOLUTION OF SaaS
59


service. Experts and evangelists are in unison that cloud is to rock the total IT
community as the best possible infrastructural solution for effective service
delivery. There are several ways clouds can be leveraged inspiringly and
incredibly for diverse IT problems. Today there is a small list of services being
delivered via the clouds and in future, many more critical applications will be
deployed and consumed. In short, clouds are set to decimate all kinds of IT
inﬂexibility and dawn a growing array of innovations to prepare the present
day IT for sustainable prosperity.
IT as a Service (ITaaS) is the most recent and efﬁcient delivery method in the
decisive IT landscape. With the meteoric and mesmerizing rise of the service
orientation principles, every single IT resource, activity and infrastructure is
being viewed and visualized as a service that sets the tone for the grand
unfolding of the dreamt service era. These days, systems are designed and
engineered as elegant collections of enterprising and evolving services. Infra-
structures are service-enabled to be actively participative and collaborative. In
the same tenor, the much-maligned delivery aspect too has gone through several
transformations and today the whole world has solidly settled for the green
paradigm ‘IT as a service (ITaaS)’. This is accentuated due to the pervasive
Internet. Also we are bombarded with innumerable implementation technolo-
gies and methodologies. Clouds, as indicated above, is the most visible and
viable infrastructure for realizing ITaaS. Another inﬂuential and impressive
factor is the maturity obtained in the consumption-based metering and billing
capability. HP even proclaims this evolving trend as ‘everything as a service’.
Integration as a service (IaaS) is the budding and distinctive capability of
clouds in fulﬁlling the business integration requirements. Increasingly business
applications are deployed in clouds to reap the business and technical beneﬁts.
On the other hand, there are still innumerable applications and data sources
locally stationed and sustained primarily due to the security reason. The
question here is how to create a seamless connectivity between those hosted
and on-premise applications to empower them to work together. IaaS over-
comes these challenges by smartly utilizing the time-tested business-to-business
(B2B) integration technology as the value-added bridge between SaaS solutions
and in-house business applications.
B2B systems are capable of driving this new on-demand integration model
because they are traditionally employed to automate business processes
between manufacturers and their trading partners. That means they provide
application-to-application connectivity along with the functionality that is very
crucial for linking internal and external software securely. Unlike the conven-
tional EAI solutions designed only for internal data sharing, B2B platforms
have the ability to encrypt ﬁles for safe passage across the public network,
manage large data volumes, transfer batch ﬁles, convert disparate ﬁle formats,
and guarantee data delivery across multiple enterprises. IaaS just imitates this
established communication and collaboration model to create reliable and
durable linkage for ensuring smooth data passage between traditional and
cloud systems over the Web infrastructure.
60
ENRICHING THE ‘INTEGRATION AS A SERVICE’ PARADIGM FOR THE CLOUD ERA


The use of hub & spoke (H&S) architecture further simpliﬁes the imple-
mentation and avoids placing an excessive processing burden on the customer
sides. The hub is installed at the SaaS provider’s cloud center to do the heavy
lifting such as reformatting ﬁles. A spoke unit at each user site typically acts as
basic data transfer utility. With these pieces in place, SaaS providers can offer
integration services under the same subscription / usage-based pricing model as
their core offerings. This trend of moving all kinds of common and centralised
services to clouds is gaining momentum these days. As resources are getting
distributed and decentralised, linking and leveraging them for multiple purposes
need a multifaceted infrastructure. Clouds, being the Web-based infrastructures
are the best ﬁt for hosting scores of uniﬁed and utility-like platforms to take care
of all sorts of brokering needs among connected and distributed ICT systems.
1. The Web is the largest digital information superhighway
2. The Web is the largest repository of all kinds of resources such as web
pages, applications comprising enterprise components, business services,
beans, POJOs, blogs, corporate data, etc.
3. The Web is turning out to be the open, cost-effective and generic business
execution platform (E-commerce, business, auction, etc. happen in the
web for global users) comprising a wider variety of containers, adaptors,
drivers, connectors, etc.
4. The Web is the global-scale communication infrastructure (VoIP, Video
conferencing, IP TV etc,)
5. The Web is the next-generation discovery, Connectivity, and integration
middleware
Thus the unprecedented absorption and adoption of the Internet is the key
driver for the continued success of the cloud computing.
3.4
THE CHALLENGES OF SaaS PARADIGM
As with any new technology, SaaS and cloud concepts too suffer a number of
limitations. These technologies are being diligently examined for speciﬁc
situations and scenarios. The prickling and tricky issues in different layers
and levels are being looked into. The overall views are listed out below. Loss or
lack of the following features deters the massive adoption of clouds
1.
Controllability
2.
Visibility & ﬂexibility
3.
Security and Privacy
4.
High Performance and Availability
5.
Integration and Composition
6.
Standards
3.4
THE CHALLENGES OF SaaS PARADIGM
61


A number of approaches are being investigated for resolving the identiﬁed
issues and ﬂaws. Private cloud, hybrid and the latest community cloud are
being prescribed as the solution for most of these inefﬁciencies and deﬁciencies.
As rightly pointed out by someone in his weblogs, still there are miles to go.
There are several companies focusing on this issue. Boomi (http://www.dell
.com/) is one among them. This company has published several well-written
white papers elaborating the issues confronting those enterprises thinking and
trying to embrace the third-party public clouds for hosting their services
and applications.
Integration Conundrum. While SaaS applications offer outstanding value in
terms of features and functionalities relative to cost, they have introduced
several challenges speciﬁc to integration. The ﬁrst issue is that the majority of
SaaS applications are point solutions and service one line of business. As a
result, companies without a method of synchronizing data between multiple
lines of businesses are at a serious disadvantage in terms of maintaining
accurate data, forecasting, and automating key business processes. Real-time
data and functionality sharing is an essential ingredient for clouds.
APIs are Insufﬁcient. Many SaaS providers have responded to the integra-
tion challenge by developing application programming interfaces (APIs).
Unfortunately, accessing and managing data via an API requires a signiﬁcant
amount of coding as well as maintenance due to frequent API modiﬁcations
and updates. Furthermore, despite the advent of web services, there is little to
no standardization or consensus on the structure or format of SaaS APIs. As a
result, the IT department expends an excess amount of time and resources
developing and maintaining a unique method of communication for the API of
each SaaS application deployed within the organization.
Data Transmission Security. SaaS providers go to great length to ensure
that customer data is secure within the hosted environment. However, the need
to transfer data from on-premise systems or applications behind the ﬁrewall
with SaaS applications hosted outside of the client’s data center poses new
challenges that need to be addressed by the integration solution of choice. It is
critical that the integration solution is able to synchronize data bi-directionally
from SaaS to on-premise without opening the ﬁrewall. Best-of-breed integra-
tion providers can offer the ability to do so by utilizing the same security as
when a user is manually typing data into a web browser behind the ﬁrewall.
For any relocated application to provide the promised value for businesses
and users, the minimum requirement is the interoperability between SaaS
applications and on-premise enterprise packages. As SaaS applications were
not initially designed keeping the interoperability requirement in mind, the
integration process has become a little tougher assignment. There are other
obstructions and barriers that come in the way of routing messages between
on-demand applications and on-premise resources. Message, data and protocol
62
ENRICHING THE ‘INTEGRATION AS A SERVICE’ PARADIGM FOR THE CLOUD ERA


translations have to happen at end-points or at the middleware layer in order to
decimate the blockade that is prohibiting the spontaneous sharing and
purposeful collaboration among the participants. As applications and data
are diverse, distributed and decentralized, versatile integration technologies and
methods are very essential to smoothen the integration problem. Reﬂective
middleware is an important necessity for enterprise-wide, real-time and
synchronized view of information to beneﬁt executives, decision-makers as
well as users tactically as well as strategically. Data integrity, conﬁdentiality,
quality and value have to be preserved as services and applications are
interlinked and saddled to work together.
The Impacts of Clouds [1, 2]. On the infrastructural front, in the recent past,
the clouds have arrived onto the scene powerfully and have extended the
horizon and the boundary of business applications, events and data. That is,
business applications, development platforms etc. are getting moved to elastic,
online and on-demand cloud infrastructures. Precisely speaking, increasingly
for business, technical, ﬁnancial and green reasons, applications and services
are being readied and relocated to highly scalable and available clouds. The
immediate implication and impact is that integration methodologies and
middleware solutions have to take clouds too into account for establishing
extended and integrated processes and views. Thus there is a clarion call for
adaptive integration engines that seamlessly and spontaneously connect
enterprise applications with cloud applications. Integration is being stretched
further to the level of the expanding Internet and this is really a litmus test for
system architects and integrators.
The perpetual integration puzzle has to be solved meticulously for the
originally visualised success of SaaS style. Interoperability between SaaS and
non-SaaS solutions remains the lead demand as integration leads to business-
aware and people-centric composite systems and services. Boundaryless ﬂow of
information is necessary for enterprises to strategize to achieve greater
successes, value and for delivering on the elusive goal of customer delight.
Integration has been a big challenge for growing business behemoths, fortune
500 companies, and system integrators. Now with the availability, affordability
and suitability of the cloud-sponsored and the state-of-the-art infrastructures
for application deployment and delivery, the integration’s scope, size, and scale
is expanding and this beneﬁcial extension however have put integration
architects, specialists and consultants in deeper trouble.
3.5
APPROACHING THE SaaS INTEGRATION ENIGMA
Integration as a Service (IaaS) is all about the migration of the functionality of
a typical enterprise application integration (EAI) hub / enterprise service bus
(ESB) into the cloud for providing for smooth data transport between any
enterprise and SaaS applications. Users subscribe to IaaS as they would do for
3.5
APPROACHING THE SaaS INTEGRATION ENIGMA
63


any other SaaS application. Cloud middleware is the next logical evolution of
traditional middleware solutions. That is, cloud middleware will be made
available as a service. Due to varying integration requirements and scenarios,
there are a number of middleware technologies and products such as JMS-
compliant message queues and integration backbones such as EAI, ESB, EII,
EDB, CEP, etc. For performance sake, clusters, fabrics, grids, and federations
of hubs, brokers, and buses are being leveraged.
For service integration, it is enterprise service bus (ESB) and for data
integration, it is enterprise data bus (EDB). Besides there are message oriented
middleware (MOM) and message brokers for integrating decoupled applica-
tions through message passing and pick up. Events are coming up fast and there
are complex event processing (CEP) engines that receive a stream of diverse
events from diverse sources, process them at real-time to extract and ﬁgure out
the encapsulated knowledge, and accordingly select and activate one or more
target applications thereby a kind of lighter connectivity and integration occurs
between the initiating and the destination applications. Service orchestration
and choreography enables process integration. Service interaction through ESB
integrates loosely coupled systems whereas CEP connects decoupled systems.
Besides data services, mashups perform and provide composite services, data
and views. Thus at every layer or tier in the enterprise IT stack, there are
competent integration modules and guidelines brewing for bringing up the
much-anticipated dynamic integration.
With the unprecedented rise in cloud usage, all these integration software are
bound to move to clouds. Amazon’s Simple Queue Service (SQS) provides a
straightforward way for applications to exchange messages via queues in the
cloud. SQS is a classic example for understanding what happens when a
familiar on-premise service is recast as a cloud service. However there are some
problems with this. Because SQS replicates messages across multiple queues, an
application reading from a queue is not guaranteed to see all messages from all
queues on a particular read request. SQS also doesn’t promise in-order and
exactly-once delivery. These simpliﬁcations let Amazon make SQS more
scalable, but they also mean that developers must use SQS differently from
an on-premise message queuing technology.
Cloud infrastructure is not very useful without SaaS applications that run on
top of them, and SaaS applications are not very valuable without access to the
critical corporate data that is typically locked away in various corporate
systems. So, for cloud applications to offer maximum value to their users,
they need to provide a simple mechanism to import or load external data,
export or replicate their data for reporting or analysis purposes, and ﬁnally
keep their data synchronized with on-premise applications. That brings out the
importance of SaaS integration subject.
As per one of the David Linthicum’s white papers, approaching SaaS-to-
enterprise integration is really a matter of making informed and intelligent
choices. Choices are mainly around the integration approaches to leverage
architectural patterns, the location of the integration engine, and, ﬁnally the
64
ENRICHING THE ‘INTEGRATION AS A SERVICE’ PARADIGM FOR THE CLOUD ERA


enabling technology. The unprecedented growth of SaaS means that more and
more software components are migrated and made to reside in off-premise
SaaS platforms. Hence the need for integration between remote cloud plat-
forms with on-premise enterprise platforms, wherein the customer and corpo-
rate data are stored for ensuring unbreakable, impeccable and impenetrable
security, has caught the serious and sincere attention and imagination of
product vendors and SaaS providers.
Why SaaS Integration is hard?. As indicated in the white paper, there is a
mid-sized paper company that recently became a Salesforce.com CRM custo-
mer. The company currently leverages an on-premise custom system that uses
an Oracle database to track inventory and sales. The use of the Salesforce.com
system provides the company with a signiﬁcant value in terms of customer and
sales management. However, the information that persists within the Sales-
force.com system is somewhat redundant with the information stored within
the on-premise legacy system (e.g., customer data). Thus the “as is” state is in a
fuzzy state and suffers from all kinds of costly inefﬁciencies including the need
to enter and maintain data in two different locations, which ultimately costs
more for the company. Another irritation is the loss of data quality which is
endemic when considering this kind of dual operation. This includes data
integrity issues, which are a natural phenomenon when data is being updated
using different procedures, and there is no active synchronization between the
SaaS and on-premise systems.
Having understood and deﬁned the “to be” state, data synchronization
technology is proposed as the best ﬁt between the source, meaning Salesforce.
com, and the target, meaning the existing legacy system that leverages Oracle.
This technology is able to provide automatic mediation of the differences
between the two systems, including application semantics, security, interfaces,
protocols and native data formats. The end result is that information within the
SaaS-delivered systems and the legacy systems are completely and compactly
synchronized meaning that data entered into the CRM system would also exist
in the legacy systems and vice versa, along with other operational data such
as inventory, items sold, etc. The “to be” state thereby removes data quality
and integrity issues fully. This directly and indirectly paves the way for saving
thousands of dollars a month and producing a quick ROI from the integration
technology that is studied and leveraged.
Integration has been the prominent subject of study and research by
academic students and scholars for years as integration brings a sense of order
to the chaos and mess created by heterogeneous systems, networks, and
services. Integration technologies, tools, tips, best practices, guidelines, metrics,
patterns, and platforms are varied and vast. Integration is not easier either to
implement as successful untangling from the knotty situation is a big issue. The
web of application and data silos really makes the integration task difﬁcult and
hence choosing a best-in class scheme for ﬂexible and futuristic integration is
insisted very frequently. First of all, we need to gain the insights about the
3.5
APPROACHING THE SaaS INTEGRATION ENIGMA
65


special traits and tenets of SaaS applications in order to arrive at a suitable
integration route. The constraining attributes of SaaS applications are
 Dynamic nature of the SaaS interfaces that constantly change
 Dynamic nature of the metadata native to a SaaS provider such as
Salesforce.com
 Managing assets that exist outside of the ﬁrewall
 Massive amounts of information that need to move between SaaS and
on-premise systems daily and the need to maintain data quality and integrity.
As SaaS are being deposited in cloud infrastructures vigorously, we need to
ponder about the obstructions being imposed by clouds and prescribe proven
solutions. If we face difﬁculty with local integration, then the cloud integration
is bound to be more complicated. The most probable reasons are
 New integration scenarios
 Access to the cloud may be limited
 Dynamic resources
 Performance
Limited Access. Access to cloud resources (SaaS, PaaS, and the infrastruc-
tures) is more limited than local applications. Accessing local applications is
quite simple and faster. Imbedding integration points in local as well as custom
applications is easier. Even with the commercial applications, it is always
possible to slip in database-triggers to raise events and provide hooks for
integration access. Once applications move to the cloud, custom applications
must be designed to support integration because there is no longer that low-
level of access. Enterprises putting their applications in the cloud or those
subscribers of cloud-based business services are dependent on the vendor to
provide the integration hooks and APIs. For example, the SalesForce.com web
services API does not support transactions against multiple records, which
means integration code has to handle that logic. For PaaS, the platform might
support integration for applications on the platform. However platform-to-
platform integration is still an open question. There is an agreement that a
limited set of APIs will improve the situation to an extent. But those APIs must
be able to handle the integration required. Applications and data can be moved
to public clouds but the application providers and data owners lose the much-
needed controllability and ﬂexibility, Most of the third-party cloud providers
do not submit their infrastructures for third-party audit. Visibility is another
vital factor lost out due to this transition.
Dynamic Resources. Cloud resources are virtualized and service-oriented.
That is, everything is expressed and exposed as a service. Due to the dynamism
factor that is sweeping the whole could ecosystem, application versioning and
66
ENRICHING THE ‘INTEGRATION AS A SERVICE’ PARADIGM FOR THE CLOUD ERA


infrastructural changes are liable for dynamic changes. These would clearly
impact the integration model. That is, the tightly coupled integration fails and
falters at cloud. It is clear that the low-level interfaces ought to follow the
Representational State Transfer (REST) route, which is a simple architectural
style and subscribes to the standard methods of the Http protocol.
Performance. Clouds support application scalability and resource elasticity.
However the network distances between elements in the cloud are no longer
under our control. Bandwidth is not the limiting factor in most integration
scenarios but the round trip latency is an issue not to be sidestepped. Because of
the latency aggravation, the cloud integration performance is bound to slow
down.
3.6
NEW INTEGRATION SCENARIOS
Before the cloud model, we had to stitch and tie local systems together. With
the shift to a cloud model is on the anvil, we now have to connect local
applications to the cloud, and we also have to connect cloud applications to
each other, which add new permutations to the complex integration channel
matrix. It is unlikely that everything will move to a cloud model all at once, so
even the simplest scenarios require some form of local / remote integration. It is
also likely that we will have applications that never leave the building, due to
regulatory constraints like HIPPA, GLBA, and general security issues. All of
this means integration must criss-cross ﬁrewalls somewhere.
Cloud Integration Scenarios. We have identiﬁed three major integration
scenarios as discussed below.
Within a Public Cloud (ﬁgure 3.1). Two different applications are hosted in
a cloud. The role of the cloud integration middleware (say cloud-based ESB or
internet service bus (ISB)) is to seamlessly enable these applications to talk to
each other. The possible sub-scenarios include these applications can be owned
ISB
App2
App1
FIGURE 3.1.
Within a Public Cloud.
3.6
NEW INTEGRATION SCENARIOS
67


by two different companies. They may live in a single physical server but run on
different virtual machines.
Homogeneous Clouds (ﬁgure 3.2). The applications to be integrated are
posited in two geographically separated cloud infrastructures. The integration
middleware can be in cloud 1 or 2 or in a separate cloud.
There is a need for data and protocol transformation and they get done by
the ISB. The approach is more or less compatible to enterprise application
integration procedure.
Heterogeneous Clouds (ﬁgure 3.3). One application is in public cloud and
the other application is private cloud.
As described above, this is the currently dominating scene for cloud
integration. That is, businesses are subscribing to popular on-demand enter-
prise packages from established providers such as Salesforce.com and Ramco
Systems
(http://www.ramco.com/)’s
customer
relationship
management
(CRM), NetSuite’s (http://www.netsuite.com) enterprise resource planning
(ERP), etc. The ﬁrst two scenarios will become prevalent once there are several
commercial clouds and cloud services become pervasive. Then service integra-
tion and composition domains will become an important and incredible factor
for global computing.
ISB
Cloud 2
Cloud 1
FIGURE 3.2.
Across Homogeneous Clouds.
Public Cloud
ISB
Private Cloud
FIGURE 3.3.
Across Heterogeneous Clouds.
68
ENRICHING THE ‘INTEGRATION AS A SERVICE’ PARADIGM FOR THE CLOUD ERA


3.7
THE INTEGRATION METHODOLOGIES
Excluding the custom integration through hand-coding, there are three types
for cloud integration
1. Traditional Enterprise Integration Tools can be empowered with special
connectors to access Cloud-located Applications—This is the most likely
approach for IT organizations, which have already invested a lot in
integration suite for their application integration needs. With a persistent
rise in the necessity towards accessing and integrating cloud applications,
special drivers, connectors and adapters are being built and incorporated
on the existing integration platforms to enable bidirectional connectivity
with the participating cloud services. As indicated earlier, there are
several popular and pioneering enterprise integration methods and plat-
forms such as EAI/ESB, which are accordingly empowered, conﬁgured
and customized in order to access and leverage the growing array of
cloud applications too. For attaining an enhanced performance, integra-
tion appliances are very hot in the market.
2. Traditional Enterprise Integration Tools are hosted in the Cloud—This
approach is similar to the ﬁrst option except that the integration software
suite is now hosted in any third-party cloud infrastructures so that the
enterprise does not worry about procuring and managing the hardware or
installing the integration software. This is a good ﬁt for IT organizations
that outsource the integration projects to IT service organizations and
systems integrators, who have the skills and resources to create
and deliver integrated systems. The IT divisions of business enterprises
need not worry about the upfront investment of high-end computer
machines, integration packages, and their maintenance with this ap-
proach. Similarly system integrators can just focus on their core compe-
tencies of designing, developing, testing, and deploying integrated
systems. It is a good ﬁt for cloud-to-cloud (C2C) integration, but requires
a secure VPN tunnel to access on-premise corporate data. An example of
a hosted integration technology is Informatica PowerCenter Cloud
Edition on Amazon EC2.
3. Integration-as-a-Service (IaaS) or On-Demand Integration Offerings—
These are SaaS applications that are designed to deliver the integration
service securely over the Internet and are able to integrate cloud
applications with the on-premise systems, cloud-to-cloud applications.
Even on-premise systems can be integrated with other on-premise
applications via this integration service. This approach is a good ﬁt for
companies who insist about the ease of use, ease of maintenance, time to
deployment, and are on a tight budget. It is appealing to small and mid-
sized companies, as well as large enterprises with departmental applica-
tion deployments. It is also a good ﬁt for companies who plan to use their
3.7
THE INTEGRATION METHODOLOGIES
69


SaaS administrator or business analyst as the primary resource for
managing and maintaining their integration work. A good example is
Informatica On-Demand Integration Services.
In a nutshell, the integration requirements can be realised using any one of
the following methods and middleware products.
1. Hosted and extended ESB (Internet service bus / cloud integration bus)
2. Online Message Queues, Brokers and Hubs
3. Wizard and conﬁguration-based integration platforms (Niche integration
solutions)
4. Integration Service Portfolio Approach
5. Appliance-based Integration (Standalone or Hosted)
With the emergence of the cloud space, the integration scope grows further
and hence people are looking out for robust and resilient solutions and services
that would speed up and simplify the whole process of integration.
Characteristics of Integration Solutions and Products. The key attri-
butes of integration platforms and backbones gleaned and gained from
integration projects experience are connectivity, semantic mediation, Data
mediation, integrity, security, governance etc
 Connectivity refers to the ability of the integration engine to engage with
both the source and target systems using available native interfaces. This
means leveraging the interface that each provides, which could vary from
standards-based interfaces, such as Web services, to older and proprietary
interfaces. Systems that are getting connected are very much responsible
for the externalization of the correct information and the internalization
of information once processed by the integration engine.
 Semantic Mediation refers to the ability to account for the differences
between application semantics between two or more systems. Semantics
means how information gets understood, interpreted and represented
within information systems. When two different and distributed systems
are linked, the differences between their own yet distinct semantics have to
be covered.
 Data Mediation converts data from a source data format into destination
data format. Coupled with semantic mediation, data mediation or data
transformation is the process of converting data from one native format on
the source system, to another data format for the target system.
 Data Migration is the process of transferring data between storage types,
formats, or systems. Data migration means that the data in the old system
is mapped to the new systems, typically leveraging data extraction and
data loading technologies.
70
ENRICHING THE ‘INTEGRATION AS A SERVICE’ PARADIGM FOR THE CLOUD ERA


 Data Security means the ability to insure that information extracted from
the source systems has to securely be placed into target systems. The
integration method must leverage the native security systems of the source
and target systems, mediate the differences, and provide the ability to
transport the information safely between the connected systems.
 Data Integrity means data is complete and consistent. Thus, integrity has
to be guaranteed when data is getting mapped and maintained during
integration operations, such as data synchronization between on-premise
and SaaS-based systems.
 Governance refers to the processes and technologies that surround a
system or systems, which control how those systems are accessed and
leveraged. Within the integration perspective, governance is about mana-
ging changes to core information resources, including data semantics,
structure, and interfaces.
These are the prominent qualities carefully and critically analyzed for when
deciding the cloud / SaaS integration providers.
Data Integration Engineering Lifecycle. As business data are still stored
and sustained in local and on-premise server and storage machines, it is
imperative for a lean data integration lifecycle. The pivotal phases, as per
Mr. David Linthicum, a world-renowned integration expert, are understand-
ing, deﬁnition, design, implementation, and testing.
1. Understanding the existing problem domain means deﬁning the metadata
that is native within the source system (say Salesforce.com) and the target
system (say an on-premise inventory system). By doing this, there is a
complete semantic understanding of both source and target systems. If
there are more systems for integration, the same practice has to be
enacted.
2. Deﬁnition refers to the process of taking the information culled during the
previous step and deﬁning it at a high level including what the informa-
tion represents, ownership, and physical attributes. This contributes a
better perceptive of the data being dealt with beyond the simple
metadata. This insures that the integration process proceeds in the right
direction.
3. Design the integration solution around the movement of data from one
point to another accounting for the differences in the semantics using
the underlying data transformation and mediation layer by mapping one
schema from the source to the schema of the target. This deﬁnes how the
data is to be extracted from one system or systems, transformed so it
appears to be native, and then updated in the target system or systems.
This is increasingly done using visual-mapping technology. In addition,
3.7
THE INTEGRATION METHODOLOGIES
71
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>


there is a need to consider both security and governance and also consider
these concepts within the design of the data integration solution.
4. Implementation refers to actually implementing the data integration
solution within the selected technology. This means connecting the source
and the target systems, implementing the integration ﬂows as designed in
the previous step, and then other steps required getting the data integra-
tion solution up-and-running
5. Testing refers to assuring that the integration is properly designed
and implemented and that the data synchronizes properly between
the involved systems. This means looking at known test data within the
source system and monitoring how the information ﬂows to the target
system. We need to insure that the data mediation mechanisms function
correctly as well as review the overall performance, durability, security,
modiﬁability and sustainability of the integrated systems.
3.8
SaaS INTEGRATION PRODUCTS AND PLATFORMS
Cloud-centric integration solutions are being developed and demonstrated for
showcasing their capabilities for integrating enterprise and cloud applications.
The integration puzzle has been the toughest assignment for long due to
heterogeneity and multiplicity-induced complexity. Now with the arrival and
adoption of the transformative and disruptive paradigm of cloud computing,
every ICT products are being converted into a collection of services to be
delivered via the open Internet. In that line, the standards-compliant integra-
tion suites are being transitioned into services so that any integration need of
any one from any part of the world can be easily, cheaply and rapidly met. At
this point of time, primarily data integration products are highly visible as their
need is greater compared to service or message-based integration of applica-
tions. But as the days go by, there will be a huge market for application and
service integration. Interoperability will become the most fundamental thing.
Composition and collaboration will become critical and crucial for the mass
adoption of clouds, which are prescribed and proclaimed as the next-generation
infrastructure for creating, deploying and delivering hordes of ambient, artistic,
adaptive, and agile services. Cloud interoperability is the prime demand and the
ﬁgure 3.4 for creating cloud peers, clusters, fabrics, and grids.
3.8.1
Jitterbit [4]
Force.com is a Platform as a Service (PaaS), enabling developers to create and
deliver any kind of on-demand business application. However, in order to take
advantage of this breakthrough cloud technology, there is a need for a ﬂexible
and robust integration solution to synchronize force.com with any on-
demand or on-premise enterprise applications, databases, and legacy systems.
72
ENRICHING THE ‘INTEGRATION AS A SERVICE’ PARADIGM FOR THE CLOUD ERA


Until now, integrating force.com applications with other on-demand applica-
tions and systems within an enterprise has seemed like a daunting and doughty
task that required too much time, money, and expertise.
Jitterbit is a fully graphical integration solution that provides users a
versatile platform and a suite of productivity tools to reduce the integration
efforts sharply. Jitterbit can be used standalone or with existing EAI infra-
structures, enabling users to create new projects or consume and modify
existing ones offered by the open source community or service provider. The
Jitterbit solution enables the cool integration among conﬁdential and corporate
data, enterprise applications, web services, XML data sources, legacy systems,
simple and complex ﬂat ﬁles. Apart from a scalable and secure server, Jitterbit
provides a powerful graphical environment to help us quickly design, imple-
ment, test, deploy, and manage the integration projects. Jitterbit is comprised
of two major components:
 Jitterbit Integration Environment An intuitive point-and-click graphical
UI that enables to quickly conﬁgure, test, deploy and manage integration
projects on the Jitterbit server.
 Jitterbit Integration Server A powerful and scalable run-time engine that
processes all the integration operations, fully conﬁgurable and manage-
able from the Jitterbit application.
Jitterbit is making integration easier, faster, and more affordable than
ever before. Using Jitterbit, one can connect force.com with a wide variety
Zoho
THE CLOUD
Salesforce
Google
Yahoo
Microsoft
Amazon
FIGURE 3.4.
The Smooth and Spontaneous Cloud Interaction via Open Clouds.
3.8
SaaS INTEGRATION PRODUCTS AND PLATFORMS
73


of on-premise systems including ERP, databases, ﬂat ﬁles and custom
applications. The ﬁgure 3.5 vividly illustrates how Jitterbit links a number
of functional and vertical enterprise systems with on-demand applications
3.8.2
Boomi Software [5]
Has come out with an exciting and elegant SaaS integration product. It promises
to fulﬁl the vision “Integration on Demand”. While the popularity of SaaS
applications rises dramatically, the integration task has been the “Achilles heel”
of the SaaS mechanism. The integration challenge is real and unanimously cited
by industry analysts as the leading barrier to overwhelming SaaS adoption.
Boomi AtomSphere is an integration service that is completely on-demand
and connects any combination of SaaS, PaaS, cloud, and on-premise applica-
tions without the burden of installing and maintaining software packages or
appliances. Anyone can securely build, deploy and manage simple to complex
integration processes using only a web browser. Whether connecting SaaS
applications found in various lines of business or integrating across geographic
boundaries, AtomSphere is being presented as a centralized platform that could
deliver integration with all the beneﬁts one would expect from a SaaS solution.
As new applications are connected to the AtomSphere, they become instantly
accessible to the entire community with no adapters to purchase or upgrade
to install. Boomi offers the “pure SaaS” integration solution that enables to
quickly develop and deploy connections between applications, regardless of the
delivery model.
3.8.3
Bungee Connect [6]
For professional developers, Bungee Connect enables cloud computing by
offering an application development and deployment platform that enables
PROBLEM
SOLUTION
R & D
Sales
Manufacturing
Consumer
Marketing
R & D
Sales
Manufacturing
Consumer
Marketing
FIGURE 3.5.
Linkage of On-Premise with Online and On-Demand Applications.
74
ENRICHING THE ‘INTEGRATION AS A SERVICE’ PARADIGM FOR THE CLOUD ERA


highly interactive applications integrating multiple data sources and facilitating
instant deployment. Built speciﬁcally for cloud development, Bungee Connect
reduces the efforts to integrate (mashup) multiple web services into a single
application. Bungee automates the development of rich UI and eases the
difﬁculty of deployment to multiple web browsers. Bungee Connect leverages
the cloud development to bring an additional value to organizations committed
to building applications for the cloud.
3.8.4
OpSource Connect [7]
Expands on the OpSource Services Bus (OSB) by providing the infrastructure
for two-way web services interactions, allowing customers to consume and
publish applications across a common web services infrastructure. OpSource
Connect also addresses the problems of SaaS integration by unifying different
SaaS applications in the “cloud” as well as legacy applications running behind a
corporate ﬁrewall. By providing the platform to drive web services adoption
and integration, OpSource helps its customers grow their SaaS application and
increase customer retention.
The Platform Architecture. OpSource Connect is made up of key features
including
 OpSource Services Bus
 OpSource Service Connectors
 OpSource Connect Certiﬁed Integrator Program
 OpSource Connect ServiceXchange
 OpSource Web Services Enablement Program
The OpSource Services Bus (OSB) is the foundation for OpSource’s turnkey
development and delivery environment for SaaS and web companies. Based on
SOA, it allows applications running on the OpSource On-Demand platform to
quickly and easily tap web services. There is no longer a need to write code for
these business functions, as OpSource has already invested in the upfront
development. It is all about leveraging the OSB to quickly gain business
functions and accelerate time-to-market.
3.8.5
SnapLogic [8]
SnapLogic is a capable, clean, and uncluttered solution for data integration
that can be deployed in enterprise as well as in cloud landscapes. The free
community edition can be used for the most common point-to-point data
integration
tasks,
giving
a
huge
productivity
boost
beyond
custom
code. SnapLogic professional edition is a seamless upgrade that extends the
power of this solution with production management, increased capacity, and
3.8
SaaS INTEGRATION PRODUCTS AND PLATFORMS
75


multi-user features at a price that won’t drain the budget, which is getting
shrunk due to the economic slump across the globe. Even the much-expected
“V” mode recovery did not happen; the craze for SaaS solutions is on the climb.
The web, SaaS applications, mobile devices, and cloud platforms have
profoundly changed the requirements imposed on data integration technology.
SnapLogic is a data integration platform designed for the changing landscape
of data and applications. SnapLogic offers a solution that provides ﬂexibility
for today’s data integration challenges.
 Changing data sources. SaaS and on-premise applications, Web APIs, and
RSS feeds
 Changing deployment options. On-premise, hosted, private and public
cloud platforms
 Changing delivery needs. Databases, ﬁles, and data services
Using a unique hybrid approach, SnapLogic delivers transparency and
extensibility to adapt to new integration demands by combining the web
principles and open source software with the traditional data integration
capabilities.
Transformation Engine and Repository. SnapLogic is a single data inte-
gration platform designed to meet data integration needs. The SnapLogic
server is built on a core of connectivity and transformation components, which
can be used to solve even the most complex data integration scenarios. The
SnapLogic designer runs in any web browser and provides an efﬁcient and
productive environment for developing transformation logic. The entire system
is repository based, with a single metadata store for all the deﬁnitions and
transformation logic.
The SnapLogic designer provides an initial hint of the web principles at work
behind the scenes. The SnapLogic server is based on the web architecture and
exposes all its capabilities through web interfaces to outside world. Runtime
control and monitoring, metadata access, and transformation logic are all
available through web interfaces using a security model just like the web. The
SnapLogic web architecture also provides the ultimate ﬂexibility in functionality
and deployment.Data transformations are not restrictedto a ﬁxedsource ortarget
like traditional ETL engines. The ability to read or write a web interface comes
naturallytoSnapLogic,allowingthe creationofon-demand dataservicesusing the
same logic as ﬁxed transformations. For deployment, the web architecture means
one can choose to run SnapLogic on-premise or hosted in the cloud.
3.8.6
The Pervasive DataCloud [9]
Platform (ﬁgure 3.6) is unique multi-tenant platform. It provides dynamic
“compute capacity in the sky” for deploying on-demand integration and other
76
ENRICHING THE ‘INTEGRATION AS A SERVICE’ PARADIGM FOR THE CLOUD ERA


data-centric applications. Pervasive DataCloud is the ﬁrst multi-tenant plat-
form for delivering the following.
1. Integration as a Service (IaaS) for both hosted and on-premises applica-
tions and data sources
2. Packaged turnkey integration
3. Integration that supports every integration scenario
4. Connectivity to hundreds of different applications and data sources
Pervasive
DataCloud
hosts
Pervasive
and
its
partners’
data-centric
applications. Pervasive uses Pervasive DataCloud as a platform for deploying
on-demand integration via
 The Pervasive DataSynch family of packaged integrations. These are
highly affordable, subscription-based, and packaged integration solu-
tions. They bring a rapid, seamless, turnkey approach to cloud-based
integration for popular applications such as Salesforce, QuickBooks and
Microsoft Dynamics
 Pervasive Data Integrator. This runs on the Cloud or on-premises and is a
design-once and deploy anywhere solution to support every integration
scenario
 Data migration, consolidation and conversion
 ETL / Data warehouse
 B2B / EDI integration
Management
Schedule
Events
eCommerce
Users
Resources
Engine Queue
Listener
Engine Queue
Listener
Engine Queue
Listener
Engine Queue
Listener
Engine Queue
Listener
Load Balancer &
Message Queues
SaaS
Application
SaaS
Application
Customer
Customer
Scalable
Computing
Cluster
FIGURE 3.6.
Pervasive Integrator Connects Different Resources.
3.8
SaaS INTEGRATION PRODUCTS AND PLATFORMS
77


 Application integration (EAI)
 SaaS /Cloud integration
 SOA / ESB / Web Services
 Data Quality/Governance
 Hubs
Pervasive DataCloud provides multi-tenant, multi-application and multi-
customer deployment. Pervasive DataCloud is a platform to deploy applica-
tions that are
 Scalable—Its multi-tenant architecture can support multiple users and
applications for delivery of diverse data-centric solutions such as
data integration. The applications themselves scale to handle ﬂuctuating
data volumes.
 Flexible—Pervasive DataCloud supports SaaS-to-SaaS, SaaS-to-on pre-
mise or on-premise to on-premise integration.
 Easy to Access and Conﬁgure—Customers can access, conﬁgure and run
Pervasive DataCloud-based integration solutions via a browser.
 Robust—Provides automatic delivery of updates as well as monitoring
activity by account, application or user, allowing effortless result tracking.
 Secure—Uses the best technologies in the market coupled with the best
data centers and hosting services to ensure that the service remains secure
and available.
 Affordable—The platform enables delivery of packaged solutions in a
SaaS-friendly pay-as-you-go model.
3.8.7
Bluewolf [10]
Has announced its expanded “Integration-as-a-Service” solution, the ﬁrst to
offer ongoing support of integration projects guaranteeing successful integra-
tion between diverse SaaS solutions, such as salesforce.com, BigMachines,
eAutomate, OpenAir and back ofﬁce systems (e.g. Oracle, SAP, Great Plains,
SQL Service and MySQL). Called the Integrator, the solution is the only one to
include proactive monitoring and consulting services to ensure integration
success. With remote monitoring of integration jobs via a dashboard included
as part of the Integrator solution, Bluewolf proactively alerts its customers of
any issues with integration and helps to solves them quickly. For administrative
ease, the Bluewolf Integrator is designed with user-friendly administration rules
that enable the administrator to manage the ﬂow of data between front and
back ofﬁce systems with little or no IT support. With a Wizard-based
approach, the Integrator prompts are presented in simple and non-technical
terms. The Bluewolf Integrator integrates with Salesforce, BigMachines,
78
ENRICHING THE ‘INTEGRATION AS A SERVICE’ PARADIGM FOR THE CLOUD ERA


Oracle, SAP, Microsoft SQL server, MySQL, and supports ﬂat ﬁles, such as
CSV, XHTML and many more.
3.8.8
Online MQ
Online MQ is an Internet-based queuing system. It is a complete and secure
online messaging solution for sending and receiving messages over any net-
work. It is a cloud messaging queuing service. In the integration space,
messaging middleware as a service is the emerging trend. Here are some of
the advantages for using Online MQ.
 Ease of Use. It is an easy way for programs that may each be running on
different platforms, in different systems and different networks, to
communicate with each other without having to write any low-level
communication code.
 No Maintenance. No need to install any queuing software/server and no
need to be concerned with MQ server uptime, upgrades and maintenance.
 Load Balancing and High Availability. Load balancing can be achieved on
a busy system by arranging for more than one program instance to service
a queue. The performance and availability features are being met through
clustering. That is, if one system fails, then the second system can take care
of users’ requests without any delay.
 Easy Integration. Online MQ can be used as a web-service (SOAP) and as
a REST service. It is fully JMS-compatible and can hence integrate easily
with any Java EE application servers. Online MQ is not limited to any
speciﬁc platform, programming language or communication protocol.
3.8.9
CloudMQ [15]
This leverages the power of Amazon Cloud to provide enterprise-grade
message queuing capabilities on demand. Messaging allows us to reliably break
up a single process into several parts which can then be executed asynchro-
nously. They can be executed within different threads, or even on different
machines. The parts communicate by exchanging messages. The messaging
framework guarantees that messages get delivered to the right recipient and
wake up the appropriate thread when a message arrives. CloudMQ is the
easiest way to start exploring integration of messaging into applications since
no installation or conﬁguration is necessary.
3.8.10
Linxter
Linxter [14] is a cloud messaging framework for connecting all kinds of
applications, devices, and systems. Linxter is a behind-the-scenes, message-
oriented and cloud-based middleware technology and smoothly automates the
complex tasks that developers face when creating communication-based
3.8
SaaS INTEGRATION PRODUCTS AND PLATFORMS
79


products and services. With everything becoming Internet-enabled (iPods,
clothing, toasters . . . anything), Linxter’s solution securely, easily, and dynami-
cally connects all these things. Anything that is connected to the Internet can
connect to each other through the Linxter’s dynamic communication channels.
These channels move data between any number of endpoints and the data can be
reconﬁgured on the ﬂy, simplifying the creation of communication-based
products and services.
Online MQ, CloudMQ and Linxter are all accomplishing message-based
application and service integration. As these suites are being hosted in clouds,
messaging is being provided as a service to hundreds of distributed and
enterprise applications using the much-maligned multi-tenancy property.
“Messaging middleware as a service (MMaaS)” is the grand derivative of the
SaaS paradigm. Thus integration as a service (IaaS) is being accomplished
through this messaging service. As seen above, there are data mapping tools
come handy in linking up different applications and databases that are
separated by syntactic, structural, schematic and semantic deviations. Tem-
plates are another powerful mechanism being given serious thought these days
to minimize the integration complexity. Scores of adaptors for automating
the connectivity and subsequently the integration needs are taking off the
ground successfully. The integration conundrum has acquired such a big
proportion as the SaaS solutions were designed, developed, and deployed
without visualizing the need for integration with the resources at the local
and corporate servers.
3.9
SaaS INTEGRATION SERVICES
We have seen the state-of-the-art cloud-based data integration platforms
for real-time data sharing among enterprise information systems and cloud
applications.
Another
fast-emerging
option
is
to
link
enterprise
and
cloud systems via messaging. This has forced vendors and service organizations
to take message oriented middleware (MoM) to the all-powerful cloud
infrastructures. Going forward, there are coordinated and calculated efforts
for taking the standards-compatible enterprise service bus (ESB) to clouds in
order to guarantee message enrichment, mediation, content and context-
based message routing. Thus both loosely or lightly coupled and decoupled
cloud services and applications will become a reality soon with the maturity and
durability of message-centric and cloud-based service bus suites. We can still
visualise the deployment of complex event processing (CEP) engines in clouds
in order to capture and capitalise streams of events from diverse sources in
different formats and forms in order to infer the existing and emerging situation
precisely and concisely. Further on, all kinds of risks, threats, vulnerabilities,
opportunities, trends, tips, associations, patterns, and other tactical as well as
strategic insights and actionable insights can be deduced to act upon con-
ﬁdently and at real time.
80
ENRICHING THE ‘INTEGRATION AS A SERVICE’ PARADIGM FOR THE CLOUD ERA


In a highly interoperable environment, seamless and spontaneous composi-
tion and collaboration would happen in order to create sophisticated services
dynamically. Context-aware applications covering all kinds of constituents and
participants (self, surroundings and situation-aware devices, sensors, robots,
instruments, media players, utensils, consumer electronics, information appli-
ances, etc.), in a particular environment (home, hotel, hospital, ofﬁce, station,
stadium etc.), enterprise systems, integration middleware, cloud services and
knowledge engines can be built and sustained. There are fresh endeavours in
order to achieve service composition in cloud ecosystem. Existing frameworks
such as service component architecture (SCA) are being revitalised for making
it ﬁt for cloud environments. Composite applications, services, data, views and
processes will be become cloud-centric and hosted in order to support spatially
separated and heterogeneous systems.
3.9.1
Informatica On-Demand [11]
Informatica offers a set of innovative on-demand data integration solutions
called Informatica On-Demand Services. This is a cluster of easy-to-use SaaS
offerings, which facilitate integrating data in SaaS applications, seamlessly and
securely across the Internet with data in on-premise applications. The Infor-
matica on-demand service is a subscription-based integration service that
provides all the relevant features and functions, using an on-demand or an
as-a-service delivery model. This means the integration service is remotely
hosted, and thus provides the beneﬁt of not having to purchase or host
software. There are a few key beneﬁts to leveraging this maturing technology.
 Rapid development and deployment with zero maintenance of the
integration technology.
 Automatically upgraded and continuously enhanced by vendor.
 Proven SaaS integration solutions, such as integration with Salesforce
.com, meaning that the connections and the metadata understanding are
provided.
 Proven data transfer and translation technology, meaning that core
integration services such as connectivity and semantic mediation are built
into the technology.
Informatica On-Demand has taken the unique approach of moving its
industry leading PowerCenter Data Integration Platform to the hosted model
and then conﬁguring it to be a true multi-tenant solution. That means that
when developing new features or enhancements, they are immediately made
available to all of their customers transparently. That means, no complex
software upgrades required and no additional fee is demanded. Fixing,
patching, versioning, etc are taken care of by the providers at no cost for the
subscribers. Still the service and operation level agreements are being fully met.
And the multi-tenant architecture means that bandwidth and scalability are
3.9
SaaS INTEGRATION SERVICES
81


shared resources so meeting different capacity demands becomes smoother and
simpler.
3.9.2
Microsoft Internet Service Bus (ISB) [13]
Azure is an upcoming cloud operating system from Microsoft. This makes
development, depositing and delivering Web and Windows application on
cloud centers easier and cost-effective. Developers’ productivity shoots up,
customers’ preferences are being provided, the enterprise goal of “more with
less” gets achieved, etc. Azure is being projected as the comprehensive yet
compact cloud framework that comprises a wider variety of enabling tools for a
slew of tasks and a growing service portfolio. The primary components are
explained below.
Microsoft .NET Services. is a set of Microsoft-built and hosted cloud
infrastructure services for building Internet-enabled applications and the ISB
acts as the cloud middleware providing diverse applications with a common
infrastructure to name, discover, expose, secure and orchestrate web services.
The following are the three broad areas.
.NET Service Bus. The .NET Service Bus (ﬁgure 3.7) provides a hosted,
secure, and broadly accessible infrastructure for pervasive communication,
End Users
End Users
Google App Engine
Application
Windows Azure
Applications
Console Application
Exposing Web Services
via Service Bus
Azure Service Platform
.Net Services Service Bus
FIGURE 3.7.
.NET Service Bus.
82
ENRICHING THE ‘INTEGRATION AS A SERVICE’ PARADIGM FOR THE CLOUD ERA


large-scale event distribution, naming, and service publishing. Services can be
exposed through the Service Bus Relay, providing connectivity options for
service endpoints that would otherwise be difﬁcult or impossible to reach.
Endpoints can be located behind network address translation (NAT) bound-
aries or bound to frequently changing, dynamically assigned IP addresses, or
both.
.NET Access Control Service. The .NET Access Control Service is a hosted,
secure, standards-based infrastructure for multiparty, federated authentication,
rules-driven, and claims-based authorization. The Access Control Service’s
capabilities range from simple, one-step, user name/password-based authenti-
cation and authorization with Web-style HTTP requests to sophisticated WS-
Federation scenarios that employ two or more collaborating WS-Trust Security
Token Services. The Access Control Service allows applications to rely on
.NET Services solution credentials for simple scenarios or on on-premise
enterprise accounts managed in Microsoft Active Directory and federated
with the Access Control Service via next-generation Microsoft Active Directory
Federation Services.
.NET Workﬂow Service. The .NET Workﬂow Service provide a hosted
environment for service orchestration based on the familiar Windows Work-
ﬂow Foundation (WWF) development experience. The Workﬂow services will
provide a set of specialized activities for rules-based control ﬂow, service
invocation, as well as message processing and correlation that can be executed
on demand, on schedule, and at scale inside the.NET Services environment.
The most important part of the Azure is actually the service bus represented
as a WCF architecture. The key capabilities of the Service Bus are
 A federated namespace model that provides a shared, hierarchical name-
space into which services can be mapped. This allows providing any
endpoint with a stable, Internet-accessible URI, regardless of the location.
 A service registry service that provides an opt-in model for publishing
service endpoints into a lightweight, hierarchical, and RSS-based discov-
ery mechanism.
 A lightweight and scalable publish/subscribe event bus.
 A relay and connectivity service with advanced NAT traversal and pull-
mode message delivery capabilities acting as a “perimeter network (also
known as DMZ, demilitarized zone, and screened subnet) in the sky” for
services that would otherwise be unreachable due to NAT/Firewall
restrictions or frequently changing dynamic IP addresses, or that do not
allow any incoming connections due to other technical limitations.
Relay Services. Often when we connect a service, it is located behind the
ﬁrewall and behind the load balancer. Its address is dynamic and can be
3.9
SaaS INTEGRATION SERVICES
83


resolved only on local network. When we are having the service call-backs to
the client, the connectivity challenges lead to scalability, availability and
security issues. The solution to Internet connectivity challenges is instead of
connecting client directly to the service we can use a relay service as pictorially
represented in the relay service ﬁgure 3.8.
The Relay service is a service residing in the cloud whose job is to assist the
connectivity and relaying the calls to the service. Relay Service solution require
both the client and the service intranets to allow connections to the cloud.
3.10
BUSINESSES-TO-BUSINESS INTEGRATION (B2Bi) SERVICES
B2Bi has been a mainstream activity for connecting geographically distributed
businesses for purposeful and beneﬁcial cooperation. Products vendors have
come out with competent B2B hubs and suites for enabling smooth data
sharing in standards-compliant manner among the participating enterprises.
Now with the surging popularity of clouds, there are serious and sincere efforts
to posit these products in clouds in order to deliver B2Bi as a service with very
lest investment and maintenance costs. The cloud ideas and ideals lay the
strong and stimulating foundation for transitioning from the capital expendi-
ture to operational expenditure and for sustaining the transformed.
There are several proven integration methods in the B2Bi space and they can
be captured and capitalized for achieving quicker success and better return and
value in the evolving IaaS landscape. B2Bi systems are good candidate for IaaS
as they are traditionally employed to automate business processes between
manufacturers and their external trading partners such as retail, warehouse,
transport, and inventory systems. This means that they provide application-to-
application (A2A) connectivity along with functionality that is crucial to
Relay Service
Client
Service
FIGURE 3.8.
The .NET Relay Service.
84
ENRICHING THE ‘INTEGRATION AS A SERVICE’ PARADIGM FOR THE CLOUD ERA


linking internal and external software: i.e. secure data exchange across the
corporate ﬁrewall. Unlike pure EAI solutions designed only for internal data
sharing, B2Bi platforms have the ability to encrypt ﬁles for safe passage across
the public network, manage large data volumes, transfer batch ﬁles, convert
disparate ﬁle formats and guarantee data accuracy, integrity, conﬁdentiality,
and delivery. Just as these abilities ensure smooth communication between
manufacturers and their external suppliers or customers, they also enable
reliable interchange between hosted and installed applications.
The IaaS model also leverages the adapter libraries developed by B2Bi
vendors to provide rapid integration with various business systems. Because the
B2Bi partners have the expertise and experience ad can supply pre-built
connectors for major ERP, CRM, SCM and other packaged business applica-
tions as well as legacy systems from AS400 to MVS and mainframe. The use of
a hub-and-spoke centralised architecture further simpliﬁes implementation and
provides a good control and grip on the system management and ﬁnally this
avoids placing an excessive processing burden on the customer side. The hub
is installed at the SaaS provider’s cloud center to do the heavy lifting such as
reformatting ﬁles. A spoke unit, typically consisting of a small downloadable
Java client, is then deployed at each user site to handle basic tasks such as data
transfer. This also eliminates the need for an expensive server-based solution,
data mapping and other tasks at the customer location. As the Internet is the
principal communication infrastructure, enterprises can leverage the IaaS to
sync up with their partners across the continents towards smart and systematic
collaboration.
Cloud- based Enterprise Mashup Integration Services for B2B Scenar-
ios [17]. There is a vast need for infrequent, situational and ad-hoc B2B
applications desired by the mass of business end-users. Enterprise mashup and
lightweight composition approaches and tools are promising methods to
unleash the huge and untapped potential of empowering end-users to develop
or assemble aligned and aware composite services in order to overcome the
“long-tail” dilemma. Currently available solutions to support B2B collabor-
ations focus on the automation of long-term business relationships and still
lack to provide their users intuitive ways to modify or to extend them according
to their ad-hoc or situational needs. Conventional proceeding in the develop-
ment of such applications directs to an immense use of time and work due to
long development cycles and a lack of required business knowledge.
Especially in the area of applications to support B2B collaborations, current
offerings are characterized by a high richness but low reach, like B2B hubs that
focus on many features enabling electronic collaboration, but lack availability
for especially small organizations or even individuals. The other extreme
solutions with a low reach but high richness such as web sites, portals and
emails, lack standardization and formularization which makes them inap-
propriate for automated or special enterprises’ needs. New development
approaches are hence needed to overcome theses hurdles and hitches to involve
3.10
BUSINESSES-TO-BUSINESS INTEGRATION (B2Bi) SERVICES
85


non-technical business users into the development process in order to address
this long tail syndrome, to realize cost-effectiveness and efﬁciency gains,
and to overcome the traditional constrictions between IT department and
business units.
Enterprise Mashups, a kind of new-generation Web-based applications,
seem to adequately fulﬁll the individual and heterogeneous requirements of
end-users and foster End User Development (EUD). To shorten the traditional
and time-consuming development process, these new breed of applications are
developed by non-professional programmers, often in a non-formal, iterative,
and collaborative way by assembling existing building blocks.
SOA has been presented as a potent solution to organization’s integration
dilemmas. ESBs are used to integrate different services within a SOA-driven
company. However, most ESBs are not designated for cross-organizational
collaboration, and thus problems arise when articulating and aiming such an
extended collaboration. SOA simpliﬁes and streamlines the integration of new
and third-party services but still it can be done by skilled and experienced
developers. End-users usually are not able to realize the wanted integration
scenarios. This leads, beneath high costs for integration projects, to the
unwanted inﬂexibility, because integration projects last longer, although
market competition demands a timely response to uprising requirements
proactively.
Another challenge in B2B integration is the ownership of and responsibility
for processes. In many inter-organizational settings, business processes are
only sparsely structured and formalized, rather loosely coupled and/or based
on ad-hoc cooperation. Inter-organizational collaborations tend to involve
more and more participants and the growing number of participants also
draws a huge amount of differing requirements. Also, the participants may act
according to different roles, controls and priorities. Historically, the focus for
collaboration was participation within teams which were managed according
to one set of rules.
Now, in supporting supplier and partner co-innovation and customer co-
creation, the focus is shifting to collaboration which has to embrace the
participants, who are inﬂuenced yet restricted by multiple domains of control
and disparate processes and practices. This represents the game-changing shift
from static B2B approaches to new and dynamic B2B integration, which can
adaptively act and react to any unexpected disruptions, can allow a rapid
conﬁguration and customization and can manage and moderate the rising
complexity by the use of end-to-end business processes.
Both Electronic data interchange translators (EDI) and Managed ﬁle transfer
(MFT) have a longer history, while B2B gateways only have emerged during the
last decade. However, most of the available solutions aim at supporting medium
to larger companies, resulting from their high costs and long implementation
cycles and times, which make them unaffordable and unattractive to smaller
organizations. Consequently, these offerings are not suitable for short-term
collaborations, which need to be set up in an ad hoc manner.
86
ENRICHING THE ‘INTEGRATION AS A SERVICE’ PARADIGM FOR THE CLOUD ERA


Enterprise Mashup Platforms and Tools. Mashups are the adept combina-
tion of different and distributed resources including content, data or applica-
tion functionality. Resources represent the core building blocks for mashups.
Resources can be accessed through APIs, which encapsulate the resources and
describe the interface through which they are made available. Widgets or
gadgets primarily put a face on the underlying resources by providing a
graphical representation for them and piping the data received from the
resources. Piping can include operators like aggregation, merging or ﬁltering.
Mashup platform is a Web based tool that allows the creation of Mashups by
piping resources into Gadgets and wiring Gadgets together.
Enterprise Mashups, which are enterprise-scale, aware and ready, are
extremely advantages in B2B integration scenes. Mashups can resolve many
of the disadvantages of B2B hubs such as low reach due to hard-wired
connections. Mashups enable EUD and lightweight connections of systems.
Mashups can help adding richness to existing lightweight solutions such as
Websites or Portals by adding a certain level of formalization and standardiza-
tion. Mashups facilitate the ease of mixing and transforming various sources of
information internally and from business partners. Complexity in B2B opera-
tions is often linked with heterogeneous systems and platforms. The tedious
integration process and requirements of various support and maintenance for
the software is a major hindrance to today’s dynamic B2B integration,
especially for the small and medium enterprises.
The Mashup integration services are being implemented as a prototype in
the FAST project. The layers of the prototype are illustrated in ﬁgure 3.9
illustrating the architecture, which describes how these services work together.
The authors of this framework have given an outlook on the technical
realization of the services using cloud infrastructures and services.
Prototype architecture shows the services and their relations to each other.
The core services are shown within the box in the middle. The external services
shown under the box are attached via APIs to allow the usage of third-party
offerings to realize their functionality. Users access the services through a
Mashup platform of their choice. The Mashup platforms are connected via
APIs to the Mashup integration services.
To use the services, users have to identify themselves against the user-access
control service. This service is connected to a user management service, which
controls the users and their settings. The user management service is connected
via an API to allow the usage of external services, e.g. a corporate user database.
All data coming from the users go through a translation engine to unify the data
objects and protocols, so that different Mashup platforms can be integrated.
The translation engine has an interface which allows connecting other external
translation engines to add support for additional protocol and data standards.
The translated data is forwarded to the routing engine, which is the core of
the Mashup integration services. The routing engine takes care of processing the
inputs received from the Mashup platforms and forwarding them to the right
recipient. The routing is based on rules, which can be conﬁgured through an API.
3.10
BUSINESSES-TO-BUSINESS INTEGRATION (B2Bi) SERVICES
87


To simplify this, a Gadget could be provided for the end-user. The routing
engine is also connected to a message queue via an API. Thus, different message
queue engines are attachable. The message queue is responsible for storing and
forwarding the messages controlled by the routing engine. Beneath the message
queue, a persistent storage, also connected via an API to allow exchangeability,
is available to store large data. The error handling and monitoring service
allows tracking the message-ﬂow to detect errors and to collect statistical data.
The Mashup integration service is hosted as a cloud-based service. Also, there
are cloud-based services available which provide the functionality required by
the integration service. In this way, the Mashup integration service can reuse
and leverage the existing cloud services to speed up the implementation.
Integration Service Logic
Mashup
Integration
Services
Platform
(i.e., Google
App. Engine)
Identity
Management
Error Handling
and Monitoring
Translation
Engine
Routing Engine
Persistent
Storage
Message
Queue
Organization
Semantic
Infrastructure
Cloud Based
Services
Mule
onDemand
Mule
onDemand
Amazon S3
Amazon SQS
OpenID/Oauth
(Google)
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
COMPANY A
COMPANY B
REST
REST
HTTP
Browser
HTTP
Browser
HTTP
Browser
HTTP
Browser
HTTP
Browser
HTTP
Browser
Enterprise Mashup Platform
(i.e. FAST)
Enterprise Mashup Platform
(i.e. SAP Research Rooftop)
FIGURE 3.9.
Cloud- based Enterprise Mashup Integration Platform Architecture.
88
ENRICHING THE ‘INTEGRATION AS A SERVICE’ PARADIGM FOR THE CLOUD ERA


Message Queue. The message queue could be realized by using Amazon’s
Simple Queue Service (SQS). SQS is a web-service which provides a queue for
messages and stores them until they can be processed. The Mashup integration
services, especially the routing engine, can put messages into the queue and
recall them when they are needed.
Persistent Storage. Amazon Simple Storage Service5 (S3) is also a web-
service. The routing engine can use this service to store large ﬁles.
Translation Engine. This is primarily focused on translating between differ-
ent protocols which the Mashup platforms it connects can understand, e.g.
REST or SOAP web services. However, if the need of translation of the objects
transferred arises, this could be attached to the translation engine. A company
requiring such a service could on the one hand develop such a service and
connect it to the Mashup integration services. Another possibility for this
would be to connect existing translation services, e.g., the services by Mule on
Demand, which is also a cloud-based offering.
Interaction between the Services. The diagram describes the process of a
message being delivered and handled by the Mashup Integration Services
Platform. The precondition for this process is that a user already established a
route to a recipient. After having received a message from an Enterprise
Mashup tool via an API, the Integration Services ﬁrst check the access rights of
the sender of the message against an external service. An incoming message is
processed only if sender of the message is authorized, that is, he has the right to
deliver the message to the recipient and to use the Mashup integration services.
If he is not authorized, the processing stops, and an error message gets logged.
The error log message is written into a log ﬁle, which could reside on Amazon’s
Simple Storage Service (S3). If the message has been accepted, it is put in the
message queue in Amazon’s SQS service. If required, the message is being
translated into another format, which can also be done by an external, cloud-
based service. After that, the services can begin trying delivering the message to
a recipient. Evaluating the recipients of the message is based on the rules stored
in the routing engine which have been conﬁgured by a user before. Finally, the
successful delivery of the message can be logged, or an error if one occurred.
3.11
A FRAMEWORK OF SENSOR—CLOUD INTEGRATION [3]
In the past few years, wireless sensor networks (WSNs) have been gaining
signiﬁcant attention because of their potentials of enabling of novel and
attractive solutions in areas such as industrial automation, environmental
monitoring, transportation business, health-care etc. If we add this collection
of sensor-derived data to various Web-based social networks or virtual com-
munities, blogs etc., there will be fabulous transitions among and around us.
3.11
A FRAMEWORK OF SENSOR—CLOUD INTEGRATION
89


With the faster adoption of micro and nano technologies, everyday things are
destined to become digitally empowered and smart in their operations and
offerings. Thus the goal is to link smart materials, appliances, devices, federated
messaging middleware, enterprise information systems and packages, ubiqui-
tous services, handhelds, and sensors with one another smartly to build and
sustain cool, charismatic and catalytic situation-aware applications. Clouds
have emerged as the centralized, compact and capable infrastructure to deliver
people-centric and context-aware services to users with all the qualities inher-
ently. This long-term target demands that there has to be a cool connectivity and
purposeful interactions between clouds and all these pervasive and minuscule
systems. In this section, we explain about a robust and resilient a framework to
enable this exploration by integrating sensor networks to clouds. But there are
many challenges to enable this framework. The authors of this framework have
proposed a pub-sub based model, which simpliﬁes the integration of sensor
networks with cloud based community-centric applications. Also there is a need
for internetworking cloud providers in case of violation of service level agree-
ment with users.
A virtual community consisting of team of researchers have come together to
solve a complex problem and they need data storage, compute capability,
security; and they need it all provided now. For example, this team is
working on an outbreak of a new virus strain moving through a population.
This requires more than a Wiki or other social organization tool. They
deploy bio-sensors on patient body to monitor patient condition continu-
ously and to use this data for large and multi-scale simulations to track the
spread of infection as well as the virus mutation and possible cures. This may
require computational resources and a platform for sharing data and results
that are not immediately available to the team.
Traditional HPC approach like Sensor-Grid model can be used in this case,
but setting up the infrastructure to deploy it so that it can scale out quickly is
not easy in this environment. However, the cloud paradigm is an excellent
move. But current cloud providers unfortunately did not address the issue of
integrating sensor network with cloud applications and thus have no infra-
structure to support this scenario. The virtual organization (VO) needs a place
that can be rapidly deployed with social networking and collaboration tools,
other specialized applications and tools that can compose sensor data and
disseminate them to the VO users based on their subscriptions.
Here, the researchers need to register their interests to get various patients’
state (blood pressure, temperature, pulse rate etc.) from bio-sensors for large-
scale parallel analysis and to share this information with each other to ﬁnd
useful solution for the problem. So the sensor data needs to be aggregated,
processed and disseminated based on subscriptions. On the other hand, as
90
ENRICHING THE ‘INTEGRATION AS A SERVICE’ PARADIGM FOR THE CLOUD ERA


sensor data require huge computational power and storage, one cloud provider
may not handle this requirement. This insists and induces for a dynamic
collaboration with other cloud providers. The framework addresses the above
issues and provides competent solutions.
To integrate sensor networks to cloud, the authors have proposed a content-
based pub-sub model. A pub/sub system encapsulates sensor data into events
and provides the services of event publications and subscriptions for asynchro-
nous data exchange among the system entities. MQTT-S is an open topic-based
pub-sub protocol that hides the topology of the sensor network and allows data
to be delivered based on interests rather than individual device addresses. It
allows a transparent data exchange between WSNs and traditional networks
and even between different WSNs.
In this framework, like MQTT-S, all of the system complexities reside on
the broker’s side but it differs from MQTT-S in that it uses content-based pub-
sub broker rather than topic-based which is suitable for the application
scenarios considered. When an event is published, it is transmitted from a
publisher to one or more subscribers without the publisher having to address
the message to any speciﬁc subscriber. Matching is done by the pub-sub broker
outside of the WSN environment. In content-based pub-sub system, sensor
data has to be augmented with meta-data to identify the different data ﬁelds.
For example, a meta-data of a sensor value (also event) can be body
temperature, blood pressure etc.
To deliver published sensor data or events to subscribers, an efﬁcient and
scalable event matching algorithm is required by the pub-sub broker. This
event matching algorithm targets a range predicate case suitable to the
application scenarios and it is also efﬁcient and scalable when the number of
predicates increases sharply. The framework is shown in ﬁgure 3.10. In this
framework, sensor data are coming through gateways to a pub/sub broker.
Pub/sub broker is required in the system to deliver information to the
consumers of SaaS applications as the entire network is very dynamic. On
the WSN side, sensor or actuator (SA) devices may change their network
addresses at any time. Wireless links are quite likely to fail. Furthermore, SA
nodes could also fail at any time and rather than being repaired, it is expected
that they will be replaced by new ones. Besides, different SaaS applications can
be hosted and run on any machines anywhere on the cloud. In such situations,
the conventional approach of using network address as communication means
between the SA devices and the applications may be very problematic because
of their dynamic and temporal nature.
Moreover, several SaaS applications may have an interest in the same sensor
data but for different purposes. In this case, the SA nodes would need to
manage and maintain communication means with multiple applications in
parallel. This might exceed the limited capabilities of the simple and low-cost
SA devices. So pub-sub broker is needed and it is located in the cloud side
because of its higher performance in terms of bandwidth and capabilities. It has
four components describes as follows:
3.11
A FRAMEWORK OF SENSOR—CLOUD INTEGRATION
91


Stream monitoring and processing component (SMPC). The sensor
stream comes in many different forms. In some cases, it is raw data that
must be captured, ﬁltered and analyzed on the ﬂy and in other cases, it is stored
or cached. The style of computation required depends on the nature of
the streams. So the SMPC component running on the cloud monitors the
event streams and invokes correct analysis method. Depending on the data
rates and the amount of processing that is required, SMP manages parallel
execution framework on cloud.
Registry component (RC). Different SaaS applications register to pub-sub
broker for various sensor data required by the community user. For each
application, registry component stores user subscriptions of that application
and sensor data types (temperature, light, pressure etc.) the application is
interested in. Also it sends all user subscriptions along with application id to the
disseminator component for event delivery.
Analyzer component (AC). When sensor data or events come to the pub-sub
broker, analyzer component determines which applications they are belongs to
and whether they need periodic or emergency deliver. The events are then
passed to the disseminator component to deliver to appropriate users through
SasS applications.
Social Network
of doctors for
monitoring
patient
healthcare for
virus infection
Environmental
data analysis
and
sharing portal
WSN 1
Gateway
3
3
3
3
4
4
2
4
3
2
1
1
1
1
Gateway
Application Specific
Services
(SaaS)
System
Manager
Monitoring
and Metering
Mediator
Policy
Repository
Sensor
Cloud Provider (CLP)
Pub/Sub Broker
Event
Monitoring
and
Processing
Registry
Analyzer
Dissem-
inator
Gateway
Collaborator
Agent
Service
Registry
Servers
Gateway
Actuator
Actuator
Sensor
Sensor
WSN 2
WSN 2
Urban Trafic
prediction
and
analysis network
Other data
analysis or
social network
Provisioning
Manager
FIGURE 3.10.
The Framework Architecture of Sensor—Cloud Integration.
92
ENRICHING THE ‘INTEGRATION AS A SERVICE’ PARADIGM FOR THE CLOUD ERA


Disseminator component (DC). For each SaaS application, it disseminates
sensor data or events to subscribed users using the event matching algorithm. It
can utilize cloud’s parallel execution framework for fast event delivery. The
pub-sub components workﬂow in the framework is as follows:
Users register their information and subscriptions to various SaaS applica-
tions which then transfer all this information to pub/sub broker registry. When
sensor data reaches to the system from gateways, event/stream monitoring and
processing component (SMPC) in the pub/sub broker determines whether it
needs processing or just store for periodic send or for immediate delivery. If
sensor data needs periodic/ emergency delivery, the analyzer determines which
SaaS applications the events belong to and then passes the events to the
disseminator along with application ids. The disseminator, using the event
matching algorithm, ﬁnds appropriate subscribers for each application and
delivers the events for use.
Besides the pub-sub broker, the authors have proposed to include three
other components: mediator, policy repository (PR) and collaborator agent
(CA) along with system manager, provisioning manager, monitoring and
metering and service registry in the sensor-cloud framework to enable VO
based dynamic collaboration of primary cloud providers with other cloud
providers in case of SLA violations for burst resource demand. These three
components collectively act as a “gateway” for a given CLP in creation of a new
VO. They are described as follows:
Mediator. The (resource) mediator is a policy-driven entity within a VO to
ensure that the participating entities are able to adapt to changing circum-
stances and are able to achieve their objectives in a dynamic and uncertain
environment. Once a VO is established, the mediator controls which resources
to be used of the collaborating CLPs, how this decision is taken, and which
policies are being used. When performing automated collaboration, the
mediator will also direct any decision making during negotiations, policy
management, and scheduling. A mediator holds the initial policies for VO
creation and works in conjunction with its local Collaborating Agent (CA) to
discover external resources and to negotiate with other CLPs.
Policy Repository (PR). The PR virtualizes all of the policies within the VO.
It includes the mediator policies, VO creation policies along with any policies
for resources delegated to the VO as a result of a collaborating arrangement.
These policies form a set of rules to administer, manage, and control access to
VO resources. They provide a way to manage the components in the face of
complex technologies.
Collaborating Agent (CA). The CA is a policy-driven resource discovery
module for VO creation and is used as a conduit by the mediator to exchange
policy and resource information with other CLPs. It is used by a primary CLP
to discover the collaborating CLPs’ (external) resources, as well as to let them
3.11
A FRAMEWORK OF SENSOR—CLOUD INTEGRATION
93


know about the local policies and service requirements prior to commencement
of the actual negotiation by the mediator.
On concluding, to deliver published sensor data or events to appropriate
users of cloud applications, an efﬁcient and scalable event-matching algorithm
called Statistical Group Index Matching (SGIM) is proposed and leveraged.
The authors also have evaluated its performance and compared with existing
algorithms in a cloud based ubiquitous health-care application scenario. The
authors in the research paper have clearly described this algorithm that in sync
with the framework enables sensor-cloud connectivity to utilize the ever-
expanding sensor data for various next generation community-centric sensing
applications on the cloud. It can be seen that the computational tools needed to
launch this exploration is more appropriately built from the data center
“cloud” computing model than the traditional HPC approaches or Grid
approaches. The authors have embedded a content-based pub-sub model to
enable this framework.
3.12
SaaS INTEGRATION APPLIANCES
Appliances are a good ﬁt for high-performance requirements. Clouds too have
gone in the same path and today there are cloud appliances (also termed as
“cloud in a box”). In this section, we are to see an integration appliance.
Cast Iron Systems [12]. This is quite different from the above-mentioned
schemes. Appliances with relevant software etched inside are being established
as a high-performance and hardware-centric solution for several IT needs. Very
frequently we read and hear about a variety of integration appliances
considering the complexities of connectivity, transformation, routing, media-
tion and governance for streamlining and simplifying business integration.
Even the total cloud infrastructure comprising the prefabricated software
modules is being produced as an appliance (cloud in a box). This facilitates
building private clouds quicker and easier. Further on, appliance solution is
being taken to clouds in order to provide the appliance functionality and
feature as a service. “Appliance as a service” is a major trend sweeping the
cloud service provider (CSP) industry.
Cast Iron Systems (www.ibm.com) provides pre-conﬁgured solutions for
each of today’s leading enterprise and On-Demand applications. These solu-
tions, built using the Cast Iron product offerings offer out-of-the-box con-
nectivity to speciﬁc applications, and template integration processes (TIPs) for
the most common integration scenarios. For example, the Cast Iron solution
for salesforce.com comes with built-in AppExchange connectivity, and TIPs for
customer master, product master and contact data integration. Cast Iron
solutions enable customers to rapidly complete application-speciﬁc integrations
using a “conﬁguration, not coding” approach. By using a pre-conﬁgured
template, rather than starting from scratch with complex software tools and
94
ENRICHING THE ‘INTEGRATION AS A SERVICE’ PARADIGM FOR THE CLOUD ERA


writing lots of code, enterprises complete business-critical projects in days
rather than months. Large and midsize companies in a variety of industries use
Cast Iron solutions to solve their most common integration needs. From the
image below, it is clear Cast Iron systems have readymade.
3.13
CONCLUSION
SaaS in sync with cloud computing has brought in strategic shifts for businesses
as well as IT industries. Increasingly SaaS applications are being hosted
in cloud infrastructures and the pervasive Internet is the primary communica-
tion infrastructure. These combinations of game-changing concepts and infra-
structures have really come as a boon and blessing as the world is going
through the economic slump and instability. The goal of “more with less” is
being accomplished with the maturity of these freshly plucked and published
ideas. Applications are studiously being moved to clouds, which are exposed as
services, which are delivered via the Internet to user agents or humans and
accessed through the ubiquitous web browsers. The unprecedented adoption is
to instigate and instil a number of innovations as it has already created a lot of
buzz on newer business, pricing, delivery and accessibility models. Ubiquity
and utility will become common connotations. Value-added business transfor-
mation, augmentation, optimization along with on-demand IT will be the
ultimate output. In the midst of all the enthusiasm and optimism, there are
some restricting factors that need to be precisely factored out and resolved
comprehensively in order to create an extended ecosystem for intelligent
collaboration. Integration is one such issue and hence a number of approaches
are being articulated by professionals. Product vendors, consulting and service
organizations are eagerly coming out with integration platforms, patterns,
processes, and best practices. There are generic as well as speciﬁc (niche)
solutions. Pure SaaS middleware as well as standalone middleware solutions
are being studied and prescribed based on “as-is” situation and to-be”
aspiration. As the business and technical cases of cloud middleware suites are
steadily evolving and enlarging, the realization of internet service bus (the
internet-scale ESB) is being touted as the next big thing for the exotic cloud
space. In this chapter, we have elaborated and expounded the need for a
creative and futuristic ISB that streamlines and simpliﬁes the integration
among clouds (public, private, and hybrid).
REFERENCES
1.
M. Armbrust, A. Fox, R. Grifﬁth, A. Joseph, R. Katz, A. Konwinski, G. Lee, D.
Patterson, A. Rabkin, I. Stoica, M. Zaharia. Above the Clouds: A Berkeley View
of Cloud Computing. Technical Report No. UCB/EECS-2009-28, University of
California at Berkley, USA, Feb. 10, 2009.
REFERENCES
95


2.
R. Buyya, C. S. Yeo, and S. Venugopal, Market-Oriented Cloud Computing Vision,
Hype, and Reality for Delivering IT Services as Computing Utilities, Proceedings of
the 10th IEEE International Conference on High Performance Computing and
Communications, Sept. 2527, 2008, Dalian, China.
3.
Arista, “Cloud Networking: Design Patterns for ‘Cloud Centric’ Application
Environments”, January 2009.
4.
http://www.jitterbit.com
5.
http://www.dell.com
6.
http://www.bungeeconnect.com/
7.
http://www.opsource.net/
8.
http://www.snaplogic.com
9.
http://www.pervasiveintegration.com/
10.
http://www.bluewolf.com
11.
http://www.informaticaondemand.com
12.
http://www.castiron.com/
13.
http://www.microsoft.com/azure/servicebus.mspx
14.
http://linxter.com/
15.
http://www.cloudmq.com/
16.
Mohammad Mehedi Hassan et al., “A framework of sensor-cloud integration
opportunities and challenges”, Proceedings of the Conference On Ubiquitous
Information Management and Communication, Korea, 2009.
17.
Robert G. Siebeck et al., “Cloudbased Enterprise Mashup Integration Services for
B2B Scenarios”, MEM2009 workshop, Spain, 2009.
96
ENRICHING THE ‘INTEGRATION AS A SERVICE’ PARADIGM FOR THE CLOUD ERA


CHAPTER 4
THE ENTERPRISE CLOUD
COMPUTING PARADIGM
TARIQ ELLAHI, BENOIT HUDZIA, HUI LI, MAIK A. LINDNER, and
PHILIP ROBINSON
4.1
INTRODUCTION
Cloud computing is still in its early stages and constantly undergoing changes
as new vendors, offers, services appear in the cloud market. This evolution of
the cloud computing model is driven by cloud providers bringing new services
to the ecosystem or revamped and efﬁcient exiting services primarily triggered
by the ever changing requirements by the consumers. However, cloud comput-
ing is predominantly adopted by start-ups or SMEs so far, and wide-scale
enterprise adoption of cloud computing model is still in its infancy. Enterprises
are still carefully contemplating the various usage models where cloud
computing can be employed to support their business operations. Enterprises
will place stringent requirements on cloud providers to pave the way for more
widespread adoption of cloud computing, leading to what is known as
the enterprise cloud paradigm computing. Enterprise cloud computing is the
alignment of a cloud computing model with an organization’s business
objectives (proﬁt, return on investment, reduction of operations costs) and
processes. This chapter explores this paradigm with respect to its motivations,
objectives, strategies and methods.
Section 4.2 describes a selection of deployment models and strategies for
enterprise cloud computing, while Section 4.3 discusses the issues of moving
[traditional] enterprise applications to the cloud. Section 4.4 describes the
technical and market evolution for enterprise cloud computing, describing
some potential opportunities for multiple stakeholders in the provision of
enterprise cloud computing.
Cloud Computing: Principles and Paradigms,
Edited by Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg and
Andrzej Goscinski
Copyright r 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
97
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>


4.2
BACKGROUND
According to NIST [1], cloud computing is composed of ﬁve essential
characteristics: on-demand self-service, broad network access, resource pool-
ing, rapid elasticity, and measured service. The ways in which these character-
istics are manifested in an enterprise context vary according to the deployment
model employed.
4.2.1
Relevant Deployment Models for Enterprise Cloud Computing
There are some general cloud deployment models that are accepted by the
majority of cloud stakeholders today, as suggested by the references [1] and [2]
and discussed in the following:
 Public clouds are provided by a designated service provider for general
public under a utility based pay-per-use consumption model. The cloud
resources are hosted generally on the service provider’s premises. Popular
examples of public clouds are Amazon’s AWS (EC2, S3 etc.), Rackspace
Cloud Suite, and Microsoft’s Azure Service Platform.
 Private clouds are built, operated, and managed by an organization for its
internal use only to support its business operations exclusively. Public,
private, and government organizations worldwide are adopting this model
to exploit the cloud beneﬁts like ﬂexibility, cost reduction, agility and so on.
 Virtual private clouds are a derivative of the private cloud deployment
model but are further characterized by an isolated and secure segment
of resources, created as an overlay on top of public cloud infrastructure
using advanced network virtualization capabilities. Some of the public
cloud vendors that offer this capability include Amazon Virtual Private
Cloud [3], OpSource Cloud [4], and Skytap Virtual Lab [5].
 Community clouds are shared by several organizations and support a
speciﬁc community that has shared concerns (e.g., mission, security
requirements, policy, and compliance considerations). They may be
managed by the organizations or a third party and may exist on premise
or off premise [1]. One example of this is OpenCirrus [6] formed by HP,
Intel, Yahoo, and others.
 Managed clouds arise when the physical infrastructure is owned by and/or
physically located in the organization’s data centers with an extension of
management and security control plane controlled by the managed service
provider [2]. This deployment model isn’t widely agreed upon, however,
some vendors like ENKI [7] and NaviSite’s NaviCloud offers claim to be
managed cloud offerings.
 Hybrid clouds are a composition of two or more clouds (private, commu-
nity, or public) that remain unique entities but are bound together by
standardized or proprietary technology that enables data and application
98
THE ENTERPRISE CLOUD COMPUTING PARADIGM


portability (e.g., cloud bursting for load-balancing between clouds) [1].
Recently some cloud vendors have started offering solutions which can be
used to enable these hybrid cloud deployment models. Some examples of
these offerings include Amazon Virtual Private Cloud [3], Skytap Virtual
Lab [5], and CohesiveFT VPN-Cubed [8]. These solutions work by
creating IPSec VPN tunneling capabilities to connect the public cloud
infrastructure to the on-premise cloud resources.
The selection of a deployment model depends on the opportunities to increase
earnings and reduce costs i.e. capital expenses (CAPEX) and operating
expenses (OPEX). Such opportunities can also have an element of timeliness
associated with it, in that decisions that lead to losses today could be done with
a vision of increased earnings and cost reductions in a foreseeable future.
4.2.2
Adoption and Consumption Strategies
The selection of strategies for enterprise cloud computing is critical for IT
capability as well as for the earnings and costs the organization experiences,
motivating efforts toward convergence of business strategies and IT. Some
critical questions toward this convergence in the enterprise cloud paradigm are
as follows:
 Will an enterprise cloud strategy increase overall business value?
 Are the effort and risks associated with transitioning to an enterprise
cloud strategy worth it?
 Which areas of business and IT capability should be considered for the
enterprise cloud?
 Which cloud offerings are relevant for the purposes of an organization?
 How can the process of transitioning to an enterprise cloud strategy be
piloted and systematically executed?
These questions are addressed from two strategic perspectives: (1) adoption
and (2) consumption. Figure 4.1 illustrates a framework for enterprise cloud
adoption strategies, where an organization makes a decision to adopt a
cloud computing model based on fundamental drivers for cloud computing—
scalability, availability, cost and convenience. The notion of a Cloud Data
Center (CDC) is used, where the CDC could be an external, internal or
federated provider of infrastructure, platform or software services.
An optimal adoption decision cannot be established for all cases because the
types of resources (infrastructure, storage, software) obtained from a CDC
depend on the size of the organisation understanding of IT impact on business,
predictability of workloads, ﬂexibility of existing IT landscape and available
budget/resources for testing and piloting. The strategic decisions using these
four basic drivers are described in following, stating objectives, conditions and
actions.
4.2
BACKGROUND
99


1. Scalability-Driven Strategy. The objective is to support increasing work-
loads of the organization without investment and expenses exceeding
returns. The conditions are that the effort, costs (CAPEX and OPEX)
and time involved in accessing and installing IT capability on a CDC are
less than going through a standard hardware and software procurement
and licensing process. Scalability will often make use of the IaaS delivery
model because the fundamental need of the organization is to have
compute power or storage capacity readily available.
2. Availability-Driven Strategy. Availability has close relations to scalability
but is more concerned with the assurance that IT capabilities and functions
are accessible, usable and acceptable by the standards of users. This is hence
the objective of this basic enterprise cloud strategy. The conditions of this
strategy are that there exist unpredictable usage peaks and locales, yet the
risks (probability and impact) of not being able to satisfy demand outweigh
the costs of acquiring the IT capability from a CDC.
3. Market-Driven Strategy. This strategy is more attractive and viable for
small, agile organizations that do not have (or wish to have) massive
investments in their IT infrastructure. The objective here is to identify and
acquire the “best deals” for IT capabilities as demand and supply change,
enabling ongoing reductions in OPEX and CAPEX. There is however
always the need to support customer-driven service management based
Cloud Data Center(s)
(CDC)
Convenience-
driven: Use cloud
resources so that
there is no need to
maintain local
resources.
Market-driven:
Users and
providers of
cloud resources
make decisions
based on the
potential saving
and profit
Availability-driven:
Use of load-balanced
and localised cloud
resources to increase
availability and
reduce response time
Scalability-driven: Use of cloud
resources to support additional
load or as back-up.
FIGURE 4.1. Enterprise cloud adoption strategies using fundamental cloud drivers.
100
THE ENTERPRISE CLOUD COMPUTING PARADIGM


on their proﬁles and requests service requirements [9]. The conditions for
this strategy would be the existence of standardized interfaces between
and across CDCs, where the means by which customers access their
resources on the CDC, deploy software/data and migrate software/data
are uniformed. Ongoing efforts in the Open Cloud Computing Interface
(OCCI) Working Group and the Open Cloud Consortium (OCC) are
steps toward achieving these standards. Other features such as bidding,
negotiation, service discovery and brokering would also be required at
communal, regional or global scales.
4. Convenience-Driven Strategy. The objective is to reduce the load and need
for dedicated system administrators and to make access to IT capabilities
by users easier, regardless of their location and connectivity (e.g. over the
Internet). The expectation is that the cost of obtaining IT capabilities
from a CDC and making them accessible to users is signiﬁcantly lower
than the cost of having a dedicated administrator. However, it should be
noted that, according to a recent Gartner study [10], the major reason for
discontinuing with cloud-related strategies is the difﬁculty with integra-
tion, ahead of issues with the costs of services.
The consumption strategies make a distinction between data and application
logic because there are questions of programming models used, data sensitivity,
software licensing and expected response times that need to be considered.
Figure 4.2 illustrates a set of enterprise cloud consumption strategies, where an
(1) Software Provision: Cloud provides instances
of software but data is maintained within user’s
data center
(2) Storage Provision: Cloud provides data
management and software accesses data
remotely from user’s data center
(3) Solution Provision: Software and storage are
maintained in cloud and the user does not
maintain a data center
(4) Redundancy Services: Cloud is used as an
alternative or extension of user’s data center
for software and storage
FIGURE 4.2. Enterprise cloud consumption strategies.
4.2
BACKGROUND
101


organization makes decisions about how to best deploy its data and software
using its internal resources and those of a selected CDC.
There are four consumptions strategies identiﬁed, where the differences in
objectives, conditions and actions reﬂect the decision of an organization to
trade-off hosting costs, controllability and resource elasticity of IT resources
for software and data. These are discussed in the following.
1. Software Provision. This strategy is relevant when the elasticity require-
ment is high for software and low for data, the controllability concerns are
low for software and high for data, and the cost reduction concerns for
software are high, while cost reduction is not a priority for data, given the
high controllability concerns for data, that is, data are highly sensitive.
Implementing this strategy sees an organization requesting either software
to be delivered as a service (SaaS) by the CDC or access to some portion of
the CDC’s compute infrastructure as a service (IaaS), such that it can
deploy its application software on the provisioned resources. However,
the organization chooses to maintain its data internally and hence needs
to provide a means for the software running in the CDC to access data
within its domain. This will entail changing some properties at the ﬁrewall
or maintaining additional, supplementary software for secure access such
as VPN, application-level proxy/gateway or wrapper software that could
make the data base accessible via a remote messaging or service interface.
According to a recent Gartner survey [10], the major hindrance to SaaS
adoption is still the pricing and the lack of compelling indicators that the
long-term investment in SaaS will be more cost-effective than traditional
on-site maintenance of software.
2. Storage Provision. This strategy is relevant when the elasticity require-
ments is high for data and low for software, while the controllability of
software is more critical than for data. This can be the case for data
intensive applications, where the results from processing in the applica-
tion are more critical and sensitive than the data itself. Furthermore, the
cost reduction for data resources is a high concern, whereas cost for
software, given its criticality, is not an issue for the organization within
reasonable means. Other advantages of this strategy include the ease of
sharing data between organizations, availability, fast provisioning, and
management of storage utilization, because storage is a resource that is
constantly in demand. Hasan, Yurcik and Myagmar [11] show in their
study of storage service providers that reputation as storage vendors and
the existence of established business relationships are major success
and sustainability factors in this market.
3. Solution Provision. This strategy is relevant when the elasticity and cost
reduction requirements are high for software and data, but the controll-
ability requirements can be entrusted to the CDC. It is not the case that
controllability is an insigniﬁcant requirement; it is rather the case that the
102
THE ENTERPRISE CLOUD COMPUTING PARADIGM


organization trusts the CDC sufﬁciently to manage access and usage
control of its software and data. In some cases the organization might
have greater trust in the CDC maintaining and securing its applications
and data than it does in its own administrative capabilities. In other
words, there are perceived gains in controllability for placing the entire IT
solution (software and data) in the domain of the CDC. Solution
provision also seemed like a more viable strategy than software or
storage provision strategies, given the limitations of bandwidth between
software and data that persists, especially for query-intensive solutions.
Such a strategy is also attractive for testing systems, because these
generally will not contain sensitive data (i.e., only test data) and are
not the production-time versions of the software.
4. Redundancy Services. This strategy can be considered as a hybrid
enterprise cloud strategy, where the organization switches between
traditional, software, storage or solution management based on changes
in its operational conditions and business demands. The trade-offs
between controllability and cost reduction will therefore vary based on
changes in load experienced by the organization. The strategy is referred
to as the “redundancy strategy” because the CDC is used for situations
such as disaster recovery, fail-over and load-balancing. Software, storage
or solution services can be implemented using redundancy, such that
users are redirected for the purpose of maintaining availability of
functionality or performance/response times experienced by the user of
the service. Business continuity is then the objective of this strategy, given
that downtime and degradation of QoS can result in massive losses. There
is however a cost for redundancy, because the subscription and access to
redundant services needs to be maintained.
Even though an organization may ﬁnd a strategy that appears to provide it
signiﬁcant beneﬁts, this does not mean that immediate adoption of the strategy
is advised or that the returns on investment will be observed immediately. There
are still many issues to be considered when moving enterprise applications to
the cloud paradigm.
4.3
ISSUES FOR ENTERPRISE APPLICATIONS ON THE CLOUD
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) is the most comprehensive deﬁnition of
enterprise application today. The purpose of ERP solutions is to equip
enterprises with a tool to optimize their underlying business processes with a
seamless, integrated information ﬂow from suppliers through to manufacturing
and distribution [12] and the ability to effectively plan and control all resources
[13], [14], necessary in the face of growing consumer demands, globalization
and competition [15]. For these reasons, ERP solutions have emerged as the
core of successful information management and the enterprise backbone of
4.3
ISSUES FOR ENTERPRISE APPLICATIONS ON THE CLOUD
103


nearly any organization [16]. Organizations that have successfully implemented
the ERP systems are reaping the beneﬁts of having integrating working
environment, standardized process and operational beneﬁts to the organization
[17]. However, as the market rapidly changes, organizations need new solutions
for remaining competitive, such that they will constantly need to improve their
business practices and procedures. For this reason the enterprise cloud
computing paradigm is becoming attractive as a potential ERP execution
environment. Nevertheless, such a transition will require a balance of strategic
and operational steps guided by socio-technical considerations, continuous eva-
luation, and tracking mechanisms [18].
One of the ﬁrst issues is that of infrastructure availability. Al-Mashari [19]
and Yasser [20] argued that adequate IT infrastructure, hardware and network-
ing are crucial for an ERP system’s success. It is clear that ERP implementation
involves a complex transition from legacy information systems and business
processes to an integrated IT infrastructure and common business process
throughout the organization. Hardware selection is driven by the organiza-
tion’s choice of an ERP software package. The ERP software vendor generally
certiﬁes which hardware (and hardware conﬁgurations) must be used to run the
ERP system. This factor has always been considered critical [17]. The IaaS
offerings hence bear promising, but also challenging future scenarios for the
implementation of ERP systems.
One of the ongoing discussions concerning future scenarios considers varying
infrastructure requirements and constraints given different workloads and
development phases. Recent surveys among companies in North America
and Europe with enterprise-wide IT systems showed that nearly all kinds of
workloads are seen to be suitable to be transferred to IaaS offerings. Interest in
use for production applications is nearly as high as for test and development
use. One might think that companies will be much more comfortable with test
and development workloads at an external service provider than with produc-
tion workloads, where they must be more cautious. However, respondents in
surveys said they were either just as comfortable, or only up to 8% less
comfortable, deploying production workloads on “the cloud” as they were
deploying test and development workloads. When the responses for all work-
load types are aggregated together, two-thirds or more of ﬁrms are willing to put
at least one workload type into an IaaS offering at a service provider [21]. More
technical issues for enterprise cloud computing adoption arise when considering
the operational characteristics and behaviors of transactional and analytical
applications [22], which extend and underlie the capabilities of ERP.
4.3.1
Considering Transactional and Analytical Capabilities
Transactional type of applications or so-called OLTP (On-line Transaction
Processing) applications, refer to a class of systems that manage transaction-
oriented applications, typically using relational databases. These applications
rely on strong ACID (atomicity, consistency, isolation, durability) properties
104
THE ENTERPRISE CLOUD COMPUTING PARADIGM


and are relatively write/update-intensive. Typical OLTP-type ERP components
are sales and distributions (SD), banking and ﬁnancials, customer relationship
management (CRM) and supply chain management (SCM). These applications
face major technical and non-technical challenges to deploy in cloud environ-
ments. For instance, they provide mission-critical functions and enterprises
have clear security and privacy concerns. The classical transactional systems
typically use a shared-everything architecture, while cloud platforms mostly
consist of shared-nothing commodity hardware. ACID properties are also
difﬁcult to guarantee given the concurrent cloud-based data management and
storage systems. Opportunities arise while the highly complex enterprise
applications are decomposed into simpler functional components, which are
characterized and engineered accordingly. For example, salesforce.com focuses
on CRM-related applications and provides both a hosted software and
development platform. Companies such as taleo.com offer on-demand Human
Relationship (HR) applications and are gaining momentum in the SaaS market.
A suite of core business applications as managed services can also be an
attractive option, especially for small and medium companies. Despite the big
engineering challenges, leading software providers are offering tailored business
suite solutions as hosted services (e.g. SAP Business ByDesign).
Secondly, analytical
types of applications or so-called OLAP (On-
line Analytical Processing) applications, are used to efﬁciently answer multi-
dimensional queries for analysis, reporting, and decision support. Typical
OLAP applications are business reporting, marketing, budgeting and forecast-
ing, to name a few, which belong to the larger Business Intelligence (BI)
category [23]. These systems tend to be read-most or read-only, and ACID
guarantees are typically not required. Because of its data-intensive and data-
parallel nature, this type of applications can beneﬁt greatly from the elastic
compute and storage available in the cloud. Business Intelligence and analytical
applications are relatively better suited to run in a cloud platform with a
shared-nothing architecture and commodity hardware. Opportunities arise in
the vision of Analytics as a Service, or Agile Analytics [24]. Data sources
residing within private or public clouds, can be processed using elastic
computing resources on-demand, accessible via APIs, web services, SQL, BI,
and data mining tools. Of course security, data integrity, and other issues can
not be overlooked, but a cloud way offers a direction with unmatched
performance and TCO (total cost of ownership) beneﬁts toward large-scale
analytic processing. Leading providers have been offering on-demand BI and
analytics services (e.g. BusinessObjects’ ondemand.com and Cognos Now!).
Startup companies and niche players (e.g. Brist, PivotLink, Oco) provide a
range of SaaS BI products from reporting to ETL (Extract, Transform, Load).
One can conclude that analytical applications will beneﬁt more than their
transactional counterparts from the opportunities created by cloud computing,
especially on compute elasticity and efﬁciency. The success of separate func-
tional components such as CRM and HR offered as hosted services has
been observed, such that predictions of an integrated suite of core enterprise
4.3
ISSUES FOR ENTERPRISE APPLICATIONS ON THE CLOUD
105


functionalities emerging as on-demand solutions for small and medium
enterprises can be made, given that the transition challenges can be overcome.
4.4
TRANSITION CHALLENGES
The very concept of cloud represents a leap from traditional approach for IT to
deliver mission critical services. With any leap comes the gap of risk and
challenges to overcome. These challenges can be classiﬁed in ﬁve different
categories, which are the ﬁve aspects of the enterprise cloud stages: build,
develop, migrate, run, and consume (Figure 4.3).
At the moment, the private and hybrid models (Section 4.2) appear as most
relevant for comprehensive ERP transitioning and will hence be considered in
this discussion of challenges. The ﬁrst immediate challenge facing organiza-
tions, embarking on this transition, is the understanding of the state of their
own IT assets and what is already, can, and cannot be sublimed (the process of
transitioning from physical to less visible vapor). Based on the information
gathered by this audit they need to evaluate what can be salvaged from the
existing infrastructure and how high in the cloud stack they should venture.
Most companies are likely to stick to IaaS. However, major development shops
may envisage delving into the PaaS and SaaS sphere. Shifting the current
architecture requires us to scrap a good chunk of it, which should be taken
literally. However, we already see a sprawl of small cloud island appearing
within corporations. As this unplanned cloud spreads throughout the organiza-
tion, coherency becomes a challenge. The requirement for a company-wide
cloud approach should then become the number one priority of the CIO,
especially when it comes to having a coherent and cost effective development
and migration of services on this architecture.
Develop
Build
Migrate
Run
Consume
FIGURE 4.3. Five stages of the cloud.
106
THE ENTERPRISE CLOUD COMPUTING PARADIGM


A second challenge is migration of existing or “legacy” applications to “the
cloud.” The expected average lifetime of ERP product is B15 years, which
means that companies will need to face this aspect sooner than later as they try
to evolve toward the new IT paradigm. An applications migration is not a
straightforward process. It is risky, and doesn’t always guarantee a better service
delivery. Firstly, the guarantee that the migration process can be agnostic of the
underlying, chosen cloud technology must be provided. If such a process can be
automated, a company will still face the same amount of planning, negotiation
and testing required for risk mitigation as classical software. It is yet to be
proven that companies will be able to balance such expense with the cost cutting,
scalability and performance promised by the cloud.
Because migrating to the cloud depends on the concept of decoupling of
processes, work needs to be organized using a process (or service) centric
model, rather than the standard “silo” one commonly used in IT: server,
network, storage, database, and so on. Not all applications will be able to
handle such migration without a tedious and costly overall reengineering.
However, if companies decide to (re-) develop from scratch, they will face a
completely different kind of hurdle: governance, reliability, security/trust, data
management, and control/predictability [25] [26]. The ownership of enterprise
data conjugated with the integration with others applications integration in and
from outside the cloud is one of the key challenges. Future enterprise
application development frameworks will need to enable the separation of
data management from ownership. From this, it can be extrapolated that SOA,
as a style, underlies the architecture and, moreover, the operation of the
enterprise cloud.
Challenges for cloud operations can be divided into running the enterprise
cloud and running applications on the enterprise cloud. In the ﬁrst case,
companies face difﬁculties in terms of the changing IT operations of their day
today operation. It requires upgrading and updating all the IT department’s
components. One of these has been notoriously hard to upgrade: the human
factor; bringing staff up to speed on the requirements of cloud computing with
respect to architecture, implementation, and operation has always been a
tedious task.
Once the IT organization has either been upgraded to provide cloud or is
able to tap into cloud resource, they face the difﬁculty of maintaining the
services in the cloud. The ﬁrst one will be to maintain interoperability between
in-house infrastructure and service and the CDC (Cloud Data Center).
Furthermore, inasmuch as elasticity is touted as the killer features for
enterprise applications, most of the enterprise applications do not really face
such wild variations in load to date, such that they need to resort to the cloud
for on-demand capacity. More fundamentally, most enterprise apps don’t
support such features (apart from the few ones built from the ground up for
clouds). Before leveraging such features, much more basic functionalities
are problematic: monitoring, troubleshooting, and comprehensive capacity
planning are actually missing in most offers. Without such features it becomes
4.4
TRANSITION CHALLENGES
107


very hard to gain visibility into the return on investment and the consumption
of cloud services.
Today there are two major cloud pricing models: Allocation based and
Usage based [27]. The ﬁrst one is provided by the poster child of cloud
computing, namely, Amazon. The principle relies on allocation of resource
for a ﬁxed amount of time. The second model does not require any reservation
of resource, and the cloud would simply allocate them as a per need basis.
When this model combine two typical pricing models: Utility (pay-per-use) and
subscription based (ﬁxed per duration charge)—we see the number of variation
of offers exploding. Finding the right combination of billing and consumption
model for the service is a daunting task. However, the challenge doesn’t
just stop there. As companies need to evaluate the offers they need to also
include the hidden costs such as lost IP, risk, migration, delays and provider
overheads. This combination can be compared to trying to choose a new mobile
with carrier plan. Not to mention that some providers are proposing to
introduce a subscription scheme in order to palliate with their limited resource
within their unlimited offer. This is similar to what ISPs would have done with
their content rationing strategies. The market dynamics will hence evolve
alongside the technology for the enterprise cloud computing paradigm.
4.5
ENTERPRISE CLOUD TECHNOLOGY AND MARKET EVOLUTION
This section discusses the potential factors which will inﬂuence this evolution of
cloud computing and today’s enterprise landscapes to the enterprise computing
paradigm, featuring the convergence of business and IT and an open, service
oriented marketplace.
4.5.1
Technology Drivers for Enterprise Cloud Computing Evolution
One of the main factors driving this evolution is the concern by all
the stakeholders in the cloud ecosystem of vendor lock-in, which includes the
barriers of proprietary interfaces, formats, and protocols employed by the cloud
vendors. As an increasing number of organizations and enterprises formulate
cloud adoption strategies and execution plans, requirements of open, inter-
operable standards for cloud management interfaces and protocols, data
formats and so on will emerge. This will put pressure on cloud providers to
build their offering on open interoperable standards to be considered as a
candidate by enterprises. There have been a number initiatives emerging in this
space. For example, OGF OCCI [28] for compute clouds, SNIA CDMI [29] for
storage and data management, DMTF Virtualization Management (VMAN)
[30], and DMTF Cloud Incubator [31], to name a few of these standardization
initiatives. Widespread participation in these initiatives is still lacking especially
amongst the big cloud vendors like Amazon, Google, and Microsoft, who
currently do not actively participate in these efforts. True interoperability across
108
THE ENTERPRISE CLOUD COMPUTING PARADIGM


the board in the near future seems unlikely. However, if achieved, it could lead
to facilitation of advanced scenarios and thus drive the mainstream adoption of
the enterprise cloud computing paradigm. Another reason standards-based
cloud offers are critical for the evolution and spread of this paradigm is the fact
that standards drive choice and choice drives the market. From another
perspective, in the presence of standards-based cloud offers, third party vendors
will be able to develop and offer value added management capabilities in the
form of independent cloud management tools. Moreover, vendors with existing
IT management tools in the market would be able to extend these tools to
manage cloud solutions, hence facilitating organizations to preserve their
existing investments in IT management solutions and use them for managing
their hybrid cloud deployments.
Part of preserving investments is maintaining the assurance that cloud
resources and services powering the business operations perform according
to the business requirements. Underperforming resources or service disruptions
lead to business and ﬁnancial loss, reduced business credibility, reputation,
and marginalized user productivity. In the face of lack of control over the
environment in which the resources and services are operating, enterprise
would like sufﬁcient assurances and guarantees to eliminate performance
issues, and lack of compliance to security or governance standards (e.g. PCI,
HPIAA, SOX, etc.) which can potentially lead to service disruptions, business
loss, or damaged reputation. Service level agreements (SLA) can prove to be a
useful instrument in facilitating enterprises’ trust in cloud-based services.
Currently, the cloud solutions come with primitive or non existing SLAs.
This is surely bound to change; as the cloud market gets crowded with
increasing number of cloud offers, providers have to gain some competitive
differentiation to capture larger share of the market. This is particularly true
for market segments represented by enterprises and large organizations.
Enterprise will be particularly interested to choose the offering with sophisti-
cated SLAs providing assurances for the issues mentioned above.
Another important factor in this regard is lack of insights into the
performance and health of the resources and service deployed on the cloud,
such that this is another area of technology evolution that will be pushed.
Currently, cloud providers don’t offer sophisticated monitoring and reporting
capabilities which can allow customers to comprehend and analyze the
operations of these resources and services. However, recently, solutions have
started to emerge to address this issue [3234]. Nonetheless, this is one of the
areas where cloud providers need to improve their offerings. It is believed that
the situation will then improve because the enterprise cloud adoption phenom-
enon will make it imperative for the cloud providers to deliver sophisticated
monitoring and reporting capabilities for the customers. This requirement
would become ever more critical with the introduction of sophisticated SLAs,
because customers would like to get insights into the service and resource
behaviors for detecting SLA compliance violations. Moreover, cloud providers
would need to expose this information through a standardized programmatic
4.5
ENTERPRISE CLOUD TECHNOLOGY AND MARKET EVOLUTION
109


interface so customers can feed this information into their planning tools.
Another important advancement that would emerge is to enable third-party
independent vendors to measure the performance and health of resources
and services deployed on cloud. This would prove to be a critical capability
empowering third-party organizations to act as independent auditors especially
with respect to SLA compliance auditing and for mediating the SLA penalty
related issues.
Looking into the cloud services stack (IaaS, PaaS, SaaS) [1], the applications
space or SaaS has the most growth potential. As forecasted by the analyst IDC
[35], applications will account for 38% of $44.2 billion cloud services market by
2103. Enterprises have already started to adopt some SaaS based solutions;
however, these are primarily the edge applications like supplier management,
talent management, performance management and so on as compared to the
core business processes. These SaaS based applications need to be integrated to
the backed applications located on-premise. These integration capabilities
would drive the mainstream SaaS adoption by enterprises. Moreover, organiza-
tions would opt for SaaS applications from multiple service providers to cater
for various operational segments of an enterprise. This adds an extra dimension
of complexity because the integration mechanisms need to weave SaaS
application from various providers and eventually integrate them to the on-
premise core business applications seamlessly. Another emerging trend in the
cloud application space is the divergence from the traditional RDBMS based
data store backend. Cloud computing has given rise to alternative data storage
technologies (Amazon Dynamo, Facebook Cassandra, Google BigTable, etc.)
based on key-type storage models as compared to the relational model, which
has been the mainstream choice for data storage for enterprise applications.
Recently launched NoSQL movement is gaining momentum, and enterprise
application developers will start adopting these alternative data storage
technologies as a data layer for these enterprise applications.
The platform services segment of the cloud market is still in its early phases.
Currently, PaaS is predominantly used for developing and deploying situa-
tional applications to exploit the rapid development cycles especially to cope
with the scenarios that are constrained by limited timeframe to bring the
solutions to the market. However, most of the development platforms and tools
addressing this market segment are delivered by small startups and are
proprietary technologies. Since the technologies are still evolving, providers
are focusing on innovation aspects and gaining competitive edge over other
providers. As these technologies evolve into maturity, the PaaS market will
consolidate into a smaller number of service providers. Moreover, big tradi-
tional software vendors will also join this market which will potentially trigger
this consolidation through acquisitions and mergers. These views are along the
lines of the research published by Gartner [36]. Key ﬁndings published in this
report were that through 2011, development platforms and tools targeting
cloud deployment will remain highly proprietary and until then, the focus of
these service providers would be on innovation over market viability. Gartner
110
THE ENTERPRISE CLOUD COMPUTING PARADIGM


predicts that from 2011 to 2015 market competition and maturing developer
practises will drive consolidation around a small group of industry-dominant
cloud technology providers.
The IaaS segment is typically attractive for small companies or startups that
don’t have enough capital and human resources to afford internal infrastruc-
tures. However, enterprises and large organizations are experimenting with
external cloud infrastructure providers as well. According to a Forrester report
published last year [37], enterprises were experimenting with IaaS in various
contexts for examples R&D-type projects for testing new services and applica-
tions and low-priority business applications. The report also quotes a multi-
national telecommunication company running an internal cloud for wikis and
intranet sites and was beginning to test mission critical applications. The report
also quotes the same enterprise to have achieved 30% cost reduction by
adopting the cloud computing model. However, we will see this trend adopted
by an increasing number of enterprises opting for IaaS services. A recent
Forrester report [21] published in May 2009 supports this claim as according
to the survey, 25% enterprises are either experimenting or thinking about
adopting external cloud providers various types of enterprise applications and
workloads. As more and more vendors enter the IaaS cloud segment, cloud
providers will strive to gain competitive advantage by adopting various
optimization strategies or value added services to the customers. Open
standards based cloud interfaces will gain attraction for increasing the like-
lihood of being chosen by enterprises. Cloud providers will provide transpar-
ency into their operations and environments through sophisticated monitoring
and reporting capabilities for the consumer to track and control their costs
based on the consumption and usage information.
A recent report published by Gartner [36] presents an interesting perspective
on cloud evolution. The report argues that as cloud services proliferate,
services would become complex to be handled directly by the consumers.
To cope with these scenarios, meta-services or cloud brokerage services will
emerge. These brokerages will use several types of brokers and platforms to
enhance service delivery and, ultimately service value. According to Gartner,
before these scenarios can be enabled, there is a need for brokerage business to
use these brokers and platforms. According to Gartner, the following types of
cloud service brokerages (CSB) are foreseen:
 Cloud Service Intermediation. An intermediation broker providers a
service that directly enhances a given service delivered one or more service
consumers, essentially on top of a given service to enhance a speciﬁc
capability.
 Aggregation. An aggregation brokerage service combines multiple ser-
vices into one or more new services.
 Cloud Service Arbitrage. These services will provide ﬂexibility and
opportunistic choices for the service aggregator.
4.5
ENTERPRISE CLOUD TECHNOLOGY AND MARKET EVOLUTION
111


The above shows that there is potential for various large, medium, and
small organizations to become players in the enterprise cloud marketplace.
The dynamics of such a marketplace are still to be explored as the enabling
technologies and standards continue to mature.
4.6
BUSINESS DRIVERS TOWARD A MARKETPLACE FOR
ENTERPRISE CLOUD COMPUTING
In order to create an overview of offerings and consuming players on the
market, it is important to understand the forces on the market and motivations
of each player. Porter [39] offers a framework for the industry analysis and
business strategy development. Within this framework the actors, products,
and business models are clariﬁed and structured.
The Porter model consists of ﬁve inﬂuencing factors/views (forces) on the
market (Figure 4.4). In the traditional economic model, competition among
rival companies drives proﬁts to zero, thus forcing companies to strive for a
competitive advantage over their rivals. The intensity of rivalry on the market is
traditionally inﬂuenced by industry-speciﬁc characteristics [40]:
 Rivalry: The amount of companies dealing with cloud and virtualization
technology is quite high at the moment; this might be a sign for high
New Market Entrants
Buyers (Consumers)
Cloud Market
Technology Development
Suppliers
• Geographical factors
• Entrant strategy
• Routes to market
• Cost structure
• Product/service ranges
• Differentiation, strategy
• Number/size of players
• Level of quality
• Supplier’s size
• Bidding processes/
 capabilities
• Substitutes
• Trends
• Legislative effects
• Buyer size
• Buyers number
• Product/service
• Requirements
FIGURE 4.4. Porter’s ﬁve forces market model (adjusted for the cloud market) [38].
112
THE ENTERPRISE CLOUD COMPUTING PARADIGM


rivalry. But also the products and offers are quite various, so many niche
products tend to become established.
 Obviously, the cloud-virtualization market is presently booming and will
keep growing during the next years. Therefore the ﬁght for customers and
struggle for market share will begin once the market becomes saturated
and companies start offering comparable products.
 The initial costs for huge data centers are enormous. By building up
federations of computing and storing utilities, smaller companies can try
to make use of this scale effect as well.
 Low switching costs or high exit barriers inﬂuence rivalry. When a
customer can freely switch from one product to another, there is a
greater struggle to capture customers. From the opposite point of view
high exit barriers discourage customers to buy into a new technology.
The trends towards standardization of formats and architectures try to
face this problem and tackle it. Most current cloud providers are only
paying attention to standards related to the interaction with the end
user. However, standards for clouds interoperability are still to be
developed [41].
Monitoring the cloud market and observing current trends will show
when the expected shakeout will take place and which companies will have
the most accepted and economic offers by then [42]. After this shakeout, the
whole buzz and hype around cloud computing is expected to be over and
mature solutions will evolve. It is then that concrete business models will
emerge. These business models will consider various ﬁelds, including e-business,
strategy, supply chain management and information systems [43], [44], but will
now need to emphasize the value of ICT-driven innovations for organizations
and users [45]. Furthermore, static perspectives on business models will not
be viable in such an ICT-centric environment, given that organizations often
have to review their business model in order to keep in line with fast changing
environments like the cloud market for the ICT sector [46], from development
to exploitation [45]. With a few exceptions [4749], most literature has taken
a fairly static perspective on business models.
For dynamic business models for ICT, it is important to incorporate general
phases of a product development. Thus, phasing models help to understand
how innovation and change affect the evolution of the markets, and its
consequences for company strategies and business models [50]. As argued by
Kijl [51], the three main phases are R&D, implementation/roll-out, and market
phase, which include the subphases of market offerings, maturity, and decline.
These three main phases, inﬂuencing the business model, are used in a
framework, visualized in Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5 also outlines which external drivers are expected to play a
dominant role throughout the phases [52]. Technology is the most important
driver for the development of new business models in the ICT sector and will
4.6
BUSINESS DRIVERS TOWARD A MARKETPLACE FOR ENTERPRISE
113


undoubtedly continue to be a major inﬂuencer of the enterprise cloud
computing evolution. However, it can be assumed that market developments
and regulation can also trigger opportunities for the development of new
products and services in this paradigm. Changes in market opportunities or
regulation enable new product and/or service deﬁnitions as well as underlying
business models. There are already various players in the cloud computing
market offering various services [53]. However, they still struggle for market
share and it is very likely that they will diversify their offers in order to meet all
the market requirements. During these efforts, some of them will reach the
mainstream and achieve a critical mass for the market while others will pass
away or exist as niche offers after the shakeout. It is increasingly necessary to
have a comprehensive model of drivers for business model dynamics [40],
[45], [54], including knowledge of actors, products and market. This is also
motivated by Porter [40], Kijl [51], and Bouwman and MacInnes [52]. How
then would such a business model be manifested?
Market
Market
Technology
Hype
Cycle Phase
Business Model
Implementation,
Roll-out
R&D
Regulations
FIGURE 4.5. Dynamic business models (based on [49] extend by inﬂuence factors
identiﬁed by [50]).
114
THE ENTERPRISE CLOUD COMPUTING PARADIGM


4.7
THE CLOUD SUPPLY CHAIN
One indicator of what such a business model would look like is in the complexity
of deploying, securing, interconnecting and maintaining enterprise landscapes
and solutions such as ERP, as discussed in Section 4.3. The concept of a Cloud
Supply Chain (C-SC) and hence Cloud Supply Chain Management (C-SCM)
appear to be viable future business models for the enterprise cloud computing
paradigm. The idea of C-SCM represents the management of a network of
interconnected businesses involved in the end-to-end provision of product and
service packages required by customers. The established understanding of a
supply chain is two or more parties linked by a ﬂow of goods, information,
and funds [55], [56] A speciﬁc deﬁnition for a C-SC is hence: “two or more
parties linked by the provision of cloud services, related information
and funds.” Figure 4.6 represents a concept for the C-SC, showing the ﬂow
of products along different organizations such as hardware suppliers, soft-
ware component suppliers, data center operators, distributors and the end
customer.
Figure 4.6 also makes a distinction between innovative and functional
products in the C-SC. Fisher classiﬁes products primarily on the basis of their
demand patterns into two categories: primarily functional or primarily inno-
vative [57]. Due to their stability, functional products favor competition, which
leads to low proﬁt margins and, as a consequence of their properties, to low
inventory costs, low product variety, low stockout costs, and low obsolescence
[58], [57]. Innovative products are characterized by additional (other) reasons
for a customer in addition to basic needs that lead to purchase, unpredictable
demand (that is high uncertainties, difﬁcult to forecast and variable demand),
and short product life cycles (typically 3 months to 1 year). Cloud services
Cloud services, information, funds
Data center
operator
Distributor
Fuctional
Innovative
Potential Closed Loop Cooperation
Cloud supply chain
Hardware
supplier
Component
supplier
Product
End
customer
FIGURE 4.6. Cloud supply chain (C-SC).
4.7
THE CLOUD SUPPLY CHAIN
115


should fulﬁll basic needs of customers and favor competition due to their
reproducibility. They however also show characteristics of innovative products
as the demand is in general unpredictable (on-demand business model) and
have due to adjustments to competitors and changing market requirements
very short development circles. Table 4.1 presents a comparison of Traditional
TABLE 4.1. Comparison of Traditional and Emerging ICT Supply Chainsa
Traditional Supply Chain Concepts
Emerging ICT
Concepts
Efﬁcient SC
Responsive SC
Cloud SC
Primary goal
Supply demand at
the lowest level of
cost
Respond quickly
to demand
(changes)
Supply demand at the
lowest level of costs
and respond quickly
to demand
Product design
strategy
Maximize
performance at the
minimum product
cost
Create modularity
to allow
postponement
of product
differentiation
Create modularity to
allow individual
setting while
maximizing the
performance of
services
Pricing strategy
Lower margins
because price is a
prime customer
driver
Higher margins,
because price is
not a prime
customer driver
Lower margins, as
high competition and
comparable products
Manufacturing
strategy
Lower costs
through high
utilization
Maintain capacity
ﬂexibility to meet
unexpected
demand
High utilization while
ﬂexible reaction on
demand
Inventory
strategy
Minimize
inventory to
lower cost
Maintain buffer
inventory to meet
unexpected
demand
Optimize of buffer for
unpredicted demand,
and best utilization
Lead time
strategy
Reduce but not
at the expense of
costs
Aggressively
reduce even if the
costs are
signiﬁcant
Strong service-level
agreements (SLA) for
ad hoc provision
Supplier
strategy
Select based on
cost and quality
Select based on
speed, ﬂexibility,
and quantity
Select on complex
optimum of speed,
cost, and ﬂexibility
Transportation
strategy
Greater reliance
on low cost modes
Greater reliance
on responsive
modes
Implement highly
responsive and low
cost modes
aBased on references 54 and 57.
116
THE ENTERPRISE CLOUD COMPUTING PARADIGM


Supply Chain concepts such as the efﬁcient SC and responsive SC and a new
concept for emerging ICT as the cloud computing area with cloud services as
traded products.
This mixed characterization is furthermore reﬂected when it comes to the
classiﬁcation of efﬁcient vs. responsive Supply Chains. Whereas functional
products would preferable go into efﬁcient Supply Chains, the main aim of
responsive Supply Chains ﬁts the categorization of innovative product. Cachon
and Fisher [58] show that within the supply chain the sharing of information
(e.g. accounting and billing) is not the only contributor to SC cost, but it is the
management and restructuring of services, information, and funds for an
optimization of the chain that are expensive [60].
4.8
SUMMARY
In this chapter, the enterprise cloud computing paradigm has been discussed,
with respect to opportunities, challenges and strategies for cloud adoption and
consumption. With reference to Gartner’s hype cycle [61], enterprise cloud
computing and related technologies is already in the ﬁrst phase called “inﬂated
expectation,” but it is likely to move quite quickly into the “trough of
disillusionment” [62]. At the moment the main adopters of cloud computing
are small companies and startups, where the issue of legacy of IT investments is
not present. Large enterprises continue to wrestle with the arguments for
adopting such a model, given the perceived risks and effort incurred. From an
analysis of existing offerings, the current models do not fully meet the criteria of
enterprise IT as yet. Progress continues at an accelerated pace, boosted by the
rich and vibrant ecosystem being developed by start-up and now major IT
vendors. It can hence be foreseen that the enterprise cloud computing paradigm
could see a rise within the next 10 years. Evidence is found in the increasing
development of enterprise applications tailored for this environment and the
reductions in cost for development, testing and operation. However, the cloud
model will not predate the classical way of consuming software services to
extinction; they will just evolve and adapt. It will have far reaching con-
sequences for years to come within the software, IT services vendors and even
IT hardware, as it reshapes the IT landscape.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This chapter combines insights that have been drawn from various EU and
Invest-NI funded projects in SAP Research Belfast. These include SLA@SOI
(FP7-216556), RESERVOIR (FP7-215605), XtreemOS (FP6-IST-033576), and
Virtex (Invest-NI).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
117


REFERENCES
1.
NIST, “Working Deﬁnition of Cloud Computing,” 2009.
2.
Cloud Security Alliance, “Guidance for Critical Areas of Focus in Cloud
Computing,” 2009.
3.
Amazon, “Amazon Virtual Private Cloud.”
4.
OpSource, “OpSource Cloud.”
5.
Skytap, “Virtual Lab.”
6.
OpenCirrus, “OpenCirrus Cloud Computing Research Testbed.”
7.
ENKI, “Outsourced IT Operations.”
8.
CohesiveFT, “VPN-Cubed.”
9.
Buyya, R., Yeo, C. S., Venugopal, S., Broberg, J., and Brandic, I., “Cloud
computing and emerging IT platforms: Vision, hype, and reality for delivering
computing as the 5th utility,” Future Gener. Comput. Syst. 25, 6 (Jun. 2009), 2009,
pp. 599616.
10.
Ben Pring and Twiggy Lo, “Dataquest Insight: SaaS Adoption Trends in the U.S.
and UK,” 2009.
11.
Hasan, R., Yurcik, W., and Myagmar, S., “The evolution of storage service
providers: techniques and challenges to outsourcing storage,” Proceedings of the
2005 ACM Workshop on Storage Security and Survivability (Fairfax, VA, USA,
November 11 - 11, 2005). StorageSS ’05. ACM, 2005.
12.
McDermott, T, “MES and ERP: Creating Synergy with Industry-Speciﬁc Solu-
tions,” APICS—The Performance Advantage, vol. 9, no. 11, November 1999, 1999,
pp. 403.
13.
Miller, GJ, “Lean and ERP: Can they Co-exist?,” PROACTION Management
Consultants—www.proaction.net/HTML_papers/LeanERPCompat.html.
14.
Sandoe, K., Corbitt, G., and Boykin, R., Enterprise Integration, New York: 2001.
15.
Ferguson, B, “Implementing Supply Chain Management,” Production and Inven-
tory Management Journal, vol. 41, no. 2, 2000, pp. 647.
16.
Nash, K.S, “Companies don’t learn from previous IT snafus,” ComputerWorld
323, 2000.
17.
T.R. Bhatti, “CRITICAL SUCCESS FACTORS FOR THE IMPLEMENTA-
TION OF ENTERPRISE RESOURCE PLANNING (ERP): EMPIRICAL
VALIDATION,” The Second International Conference on Innovation in Informa-
tion Technology (IIT’05), p. 2005.
18.
Al-Mudimigh A., Zairi M., and Al-Mashiri M., “ERP software implementation:
an integrative framework,” European Journal of Information Systems, 10, 2001,
pp. 216226.
19.
Al-Mashari, M., “Enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems: a research agenda,”
Industrial Management & Data Systems, Vol. 102, No. 3, 2002, pp. 165170.
20.
Yasser Jarrar, “ERP Implementation and Critical Success Factors, The Role and
Impact of Business Process Management,” Proceedings of The 2000 IEE Interna-
tional Conference on Management of Innovation and Technology, Singapore, 2000,
pp. 167178.
21.
Frank E. Gillet, “Conventional Wisdom is Wrong About Cloud IaaS,” 2009.
118
THE ENTERPRISE CLOUD COMPUTING PARADIGM


22.
D. Abadi, “Data Management in the Cloud: Limitations and Opportunities,”
IEEE Data Engineering Bulletin, 32(1), 2009.
23.
E. Thomsen, OLAP Solutions: Building Multi-dimensional Information Systems,
2002.
24.
Oliver Ratzesberger, “Analytics as a Service.”
25.
Daniel J. and Abadi, H., “Data Management in the Cloud: Limitations and
Opportunities,” Bulletin of the IEEE Computer Society Technical Committee on
Data Engineering, 2009.
26.
Jay Heiser and Mark Nicolett, “Assessing the Security Risks of Cloud Comput-
ing,” Gartner Report, Jun. 2008.
27.
Weiss, A., “Computing in the clouds,” netWorker 11, 4 (Dec. 2007), 2007.
28.
Open Cloud Computing Interface (OCCI) Working Group, “OCCI.”
29.
SNIA, “Cloud Data Management Initiative (CDMI).”
30.
DMTF, “Virtualization Management Initiative (VMAN).”
31.
DMTF, “Open Cloud Standards Incubator.”
32.
Amazon, “CloudWatch.”
33.
Hyperic, “CloudStatus.”
34.
Nimsoft, “Uniﬁed Monitoring.”
35.
IDC, “IT Cloud Services Forecast 20092013.”
36.
Mark Driver, “Cloud Application Infrastructure Technologies Need Seven More
Years to Mature,” 2008.
37.
James Staten, “Is Cloud Ready for Enterprises?,” 2008.
38.
Daryl C. Plummer and L. Frank Kenney, “Three Types of Cloud Brokerages Will
Enhance Cloud Services,” 2009.
39.
Michael E. Porter, Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and
Competitors, 1980.
40.
M.E. Porter, “Competitive Strategy: Techniques for Analyzing Industries and
Competitors,” Ed. The Free Press, 1980.
41.
EGEE, “Enabling Grids for E-sciencE An EGEE Comparative study: Grids and
Clouds evolution or revolution?,” 2008.
42.
D. Reeves, Data center strategies: Vmware: Welcome to the game, 2008.
43.
J. Hedman and T. Kalling, “The business model concept: theoretical under-
pinnings and empirical illustrations,” European Journal of Information Sciences,
2003, pp. 4959.
44.
S.M. Shafer, H.J. Smith, and J.C. Linder, “The power ofbusiness models. Business
Horizons,” European Journal of Information Sciences, vol. 48, 2005, pp. 199207.
45.
M. de Reuver, H. Bouwman, and I. MacInnes, “What Drives Business Model
Dynamics? A Case Survey,” Management of eBusiness, 2007. WCMeB 2007. Eighth
World Congress on the, Jul. 2007, pp. 22.
46.
A. Afuah and C. Tucci, “Internet Business Models and Strategies,” Boston
McGraw-Hill, 2003.
47.
P. Andries, K. Debackere, and B. Van Looy, “Effective business model adaptation
strategies for new technology based ventures,” PREBEM Conference on Business
Economics, vol. 9, 2006.
REFERENCES
119
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>


48.
I. MacInnes, “Dynamic business model framework for emerging technologies,”
International Journal of Services Technology and Management, vol. 6, 2005,
pp. 319.
49.
V.L. Vaccaro and D.Y. Cohn, “The Evolution of Business Models and Marketing
Strategies in the Music Industry,” JMM—The International Journal on Media
Management, vol. 6, 2004, pp. 4658.
50.
A. Afuah and C.L. Tucci, “Internet Business Models and Strategies,” Mcgraw-
Hill, 2001.
51.
B. Kijl, “Developing a dynamic business model framework for emerging mobile
services,” ITS 16th European Regional Conference, 2005.
52.
H. Bouwman and I. MacInnes, “Dynamic Business Model Framework for Value
Webs,” 39th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2006.
53.
M. Crandell, “Defogging cloud computing: A taxonomy—refresh the net,”
Gigaom, Sep. 2008.
54.
L.M. Vaquero, L. Rodero-Merino, J. Caceres, and M. Lindner, “A Break in the
Clouds: Towards a Cloud Deﬁnition,” Strategic Management Journal, vol. 22,
2009.
55.
Tsay, A., Agrawal, N., and Nahmias, S., “Modeling supply chain contracts: a
review,” Tayur, S., Ganeshan, R., and Magazine, M., editors, Quantitative Models
for Supply Chain Management, Kluwer’s International Series in Operations Research
& Management Science, chapter 10, pages 299336. Kluwer Academic Publishers,
Boston, MA, USA. F.S.Hillier, series editor, 1998.
56.
Paulitsch, M., “Dynamic Coordination of Supply Chains,” 2003.
57.
Fisher, M., “What is the right supply chain for your product?,” Harvard Business
Review, pages 105116, 1997.
58.
Lee, H., “Aligning supply chain strategies with product uncertainties,” California
Management Review, 44(3):105119, 2002.
59.
Chopra, S. and Meindl, P., “Supply Chain Management: Strategy, Planning, and
Operation,” Prentice-Hall, Inc., Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, USA, 1st edition.,
2001.
60.
Cachon, G. and Fisher, M., “Supply chain inventory management and the value of
shared information,” Management Science, 46(8):10321048, 2000.
61.
Gartner, “Hype Cycle for Emerging Technologies,” 2008.
62.
McKinsey&Company, “Clearing the air on cloud computing,” Mar. 2009.
120
THE ENTERPRISE CLOUD COMPUTING PARADIGM


PART II
INFRASTRUCTURE AS A SERVICE
(IAAS)


CHAPTER 5
VIRTUAL MACHINES PROVISIONING
AND MIGRATION SERVICES
MOHAMED EL-REFAEY
5.1
INTRODUCTION AND INSPIRATION
Cloud computing is an emerging research infrastructure that builds on the
achievements of different research areas, such as service-oriented architecture
(SOA), grid computing, and virtualization technology. It offers infrastructure as
a service that is based on pay-as-you-use and on-demand computing models to
the end users (exactly the same as a public utility service like electricity, water,
gas, etc.). This service is referred to as Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS). To
provide this cloud computing service, the provisioning of the cloud infrastructure
in data centers is a prerequisite. However, the provisioning for systems and
applications on a large number of physical machines is traditionally a time-
consuming process with low assurance on deployment’s time and cost.
In this chapter, we shall focus on two core services that enable the users to
get the best out of the IaaS model in public and private cloud setups. These
services are named virtual machine provisioning and migration services. We
will also cover their concepts, techniques, and research directions, along with
an introductory overview about virtualization technology and its role as a
fundamental component/block of the cloud computing architecture stack.
To make the concept clearer, consider this analogy for virtual machine
provisioning, to know its value: Historically, when there is a need to install a
new server for a certain workload to provide a particular service for a client,
lots of effort was exerted by the IT administrator, and much time was spent to
install and provision a new server, because the administrator has to follow
speciﬁc checklist and procedures to perform this task on hand. (Check the
Cloud Computing: Principles and Paradigms,
Edited by Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg and
Andrzej Goscinski
Copyright r 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
123


inventory for a new machine, get one, format, install OS required, and install
services; a server is needed along with lots of security batches and appliances.)
Now, with the emergence of virtualization technology and the cloud computing
IaaS model, it is just a matter of minutes to achieve the same task. All you need
is to provision a virtual server through a self-service interface with small steps
to get what you desire with the required speciﬁcations—whether you are
provisioning this machine in a public cloud like Amazon Elastic Compute
Cloud (EC2) or using a virtualization management software package or a
private cloud management solution installed at your data center in order to
provision the virtual machine inside the organization and within the private
cloud setup. This scenario is an awesome example for illustrating the value of
virtualization and the way virtual machines are provisioned.
We can draw the same analogy for migration services. Previously, whenever
there was a need for performing a server’s upgrade or performing maintenance
tasks, you would exert a lot of time and effort, because it is an expensive
operation to maintain or upgrade a main server that has lots of applications
and users. Now, with the advance of the revolutionized virtualization technol-
ogy and migration services associated with hypervisors’ capabilities, these tasks
(maintenance, upgrades, patches, etc.) are very easy and need no time to
accomplish.
Provisioning a new virtual machine is a matter of minutes, saving lots of time
and effort. Migrations of a virtual machine is a matter of milliseconds: saving
time, effort, making the service alive for customers, and achieving the SLA/
SLO agreements and quality-of-service (QoS) speciﬁcations required.
An overview about the chapter’s higlights and sections can be grasped by the
mind map shown in Figure 5.1.
5.2
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
In this section, we will have a quick look at previous work, give an overview
about virtualization technology, public cloud, private cloud, standardization
efforts, high availability through the migration, and provisioning of virtual
machines, and shed some lights on distributed management’s tools.
5.2.1
Virtualization Technology Overview
Virtualization has revolutionized data center’s technology through a set of
techniques and tools that facilitate the providing and management of the
dynamic data center’s infrastructure. It has become an essential and enabling
technology of cloud computing environments. Virtualization can be deﬁned
as the abstraction of the four computing resources (storage, processing
power, memory, and network or I/O). It is conceptually similar to emulation,
where a system pretends to be another system, whereas virtualization is
a system pretending to be two or more of the same system [1]. As shown in
124
VIRTUAL MACHINES PROVISIONING AND MIGRATION SERVICES


Ubuntu Enterprise Cloud
Architecture
Architecture
Hizea
Eucalyptus
openNebula
Infrastructure Enabling Tecnology
Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud
Amazon and Provisioning Services
Elastic Load Balancer
Auto Scaling
CloudWatch
Performance evaluation and workload characterization of virtual workloads
High-Performance Data Scaling in Private and public Cloud Environments
Cloud federations and Provisioning tools in hybrid cloud
Cisco initiative UCS (Unified Commuting System)
Self-adaptive and dynamic data center
VM scheduling alogorithms
Performance and High Availability in Clustered VMs through Live Migration
Live Migration security
Extend migration algorithm to allow for priorities
Accelerating VMs live migration time
Cloud-wide VM migration and memory de-duplication
Provisioning in the Cloud Context
Introduction and Inspiration
Cloud and Virtualization Standardization Efforts
OCCI and OGF
OVF
Distributed Management of Virtualization
Virtualization Technology
Public and Private IaaS
High Availability
VM Provisioning Process
Steps to Provision VM
VM lifecycle
Background and Related work
VM Provisioning and Manageability
VM Provisioning and Migration Services
VM Provisioning and Migration In Action
VM Migration Services
VM Migration, SLA and On-Demand Computing
Live Migration Anatomy, Xen Hypervisor Algorithm
Live Migration Effect on a Running Web Server
Live Migration Vendor Implementations Examples
Live Storage Migration of Virtual Machine
Live Migration and High availability
Migrations
Techniques
Migration of Virtual Machines to Alternate Platforms
Final Thoughts about the Example
VM Lifecycle and VM Monitoring
Deployment Scenario
Live Migration
Installation
Regular/Cold Migration
Future Research Directions
Conclusion
References
Aneka
FIGURE 5.1. VM provisioning and migration mind map.
125


Figure 5.2, the virtualization layer will partition the physical resource of the
underlying physical server into multiple virtual machines with different work-
loads. The fascinating thing about this virtualization layer is that it schedules,
allocates the physical resource, and makes each virtual machine think that it
totally owns the whole underlying hardware’s physical resource (processor,
disks, rams, etc.)[2].
Virtual machine’s technology makes it very ﬂexible and easy to manage
resources in cloud computing environments, because they improve the utiliza-
tion of such resources by multiplexing many virtual machines on one physical
host (server consolidation), as shown in Figure 5.1. These machines can be
scaled up and down on demand with a high level of resources’ abstraction.
Virtualization enables high, reliable, and agile deployment mechanisms and
management of services, providing on-demand cloning and live migration
services which improve reliability. Accordingly, having an effective manage-
ment’s suite for managing virtual machines’ infrastructure is critical for any
cloud computing infrastructure as a service (IaaS) vendor.
5.2.2
Public Cloud and Infrastructure Services
Public cloud or external cloud describes cloud computing in a traditional
mainstream sense, whereby resources are dynamically provisioned via publicly
accessible Web applications/Web services (SOAP or RESTful interfaces)
from an off-site third-party provider, who shares resources and bills on a
ﬁne-grained utility computing basis [3], the user pays only for the capacity of
the provisioned resources at a particular time.
Virtual Machine
Workload 1
Guest OS
Guest OS
Guest OS
Workload 2
Workload 3
Guest OS
Workload n
Virtual Machine
Virtual Machine
Virtualization Layer (VMM or Hypervisor)
Virtual Machine
Physical Server Layer
FIGURE 5.2. A layered virtualization technology architecture.
126
VIRTUAL MACHINES PROVISIONING AND MIGRATION SERVICES


There are many examples for vendors who publicly provide infrastructure as
a service. Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2)[4] is the best known example,
but the market now bristles with lots of competition like GoGrid [5], Joyent
Accelerator [6], Rackspace [7], AppNexus [8], FlexiScale [9], and Manjrasoft
Aneka [10].
Here, we will brieﬂy cover and describe Amazon EC2 offering. Amazon
Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) is an IaaS service that provides elastic compute
capacity in the cloud. These services can be leveraged via Web services
(SOAP or REST), a Web-based AWS (Amazon Web Service) management
console, or the EC2 command line tools. The Amazon service provides hundreds
of pre-made AMIs (Amazon Machine Images) with a variety of operating
systems (i.e., Linux, OpenSolaris, or Windows) and pre-loaded software.
It provides you with complete control of your computing resources and lets
you run on Amazon’s computing and infrastructure environment easily.
Amazon EC2 reduces the time required for obtaining and booting a new
server’s instances to minutes, thereby allowing a quick scalable capacity and
resources, up and down, as the computing requirements change. Amazon offers
different instances’ size according to (a) the resources’ needs (small, large, and
extra large), (b) the high CPU’s needs it provides (medium and extra large high
CPU instances), and (c) high-memory instances (extra large, double extra large,
and quadruple extra large instance).
5.2.3
Private Cloud and Infrastructure Services
A private cloud aims at providing public cloud functionality, but on private
resources, while maintaining control over an organization’s data and resources
to meet security and governance’s requirements in an organization. Private
cloud exhibits a highly virtualized cloud data center located inside your organi-
zation’s ﬁrewall. It may also be a private space dedicated for your company
within a cloud vendor’s data center designed to handle the organization’s
workloads.
Private clouds exhibit the following characteristics:
 Allow service provisioning and compute capability for an organization’s
users in a self-service manner.
 Automate and provide well-managed virtualized environments.
 Optimize computing resources, and servers’ utilization.
 Support speciﬁc workloads.
There are many examples for vendors and frameworks that provide infrastruc-
ture as a service in private setups. The best-known examples are Eucalyptus [11]
and OpenNebula [12] (which will be covered in more detail later on).
It is also important to highlight a third type of cloud setup named “hybrid
cloud,” in which a combination of private/internal and external cloud resources
5.2
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
127


exist together by enabling outsourcing of noncritical services and functions in
public cloud and keeping the critical ones internal. Hybrid cloud’s main
function is to release resources from a public cloud and to handle sudden
demand usage, which is called “cloud bursting.”
5.2.4
Distributed Management of Virtualization
Virtualization’s beneﬁts bring their own challenges and complexities presented
in the need for a powerful management capabilities. That is why many
commercial, open source products and research projects such as OpenNebula
[12], IBM Virtualization Manager, Joyent, and VMware DRS are being
developed to dynamically provision virtual machines, utilizing the physical
infrastrcture. There are also some commercial and scientiﬁc infrastructure
cloud computing initiatives, such as Globus VWS, Eucalyptus [11] and
Amazon, which provide remote interfaces for controling and monitoring
virtual resources. One more effort in this context is the RESERVOIR [13]
initiative, in which grid interfaces and protocols enable the required interoper-
ability between the clouds or infrastructure’s providers. RESERVOIR also,
needs to expand substantially on the current state-of-the-art for grid-wide
accounting [14], and to increase the ﬂexibility of supporting different billing
schemes, and accounting for services with indeﬁnite lifetime, as opposed to
ﬁnite jobs with support to account for utilization metrics relevant to virtual
machines [15].
5.2.5
High Availability
High availability is a system design protocol and an associated implementation
that ensures a certain absolute degree of operational continuity during a given
measurement period. Availability refers to the ability of a user’s community to
access the system—whether for submiting new work, updating or altering
existing work, or collecting the results of the previous work. If a user cannot
access the system, it is said to be unavailable [16]. This means that services
should be available all the time along with some planned/unplanned downtime
according to a certain SLA (formalize the service availaibiliy objectives, and
requirments) which often refers to the monthly availability or downtime of a
service; to calculate the service’s credits to match the billing cycles. Services that
are considered as business critical are often categorized as high availability
services. Systems running business critical services should be planned and
designed from the bottom with the goal of achieving the lowest possible
amount of planned and unplanned downtime.
Since a virtual environment is the larger part of any organization, manage-
ment of these virtual resources within this environemnet becomes a critical
mission, and the migration services of these resources became a corner stone in
achieving high availability for these services hosted by VMs. So, in the context
128
VIRTUAL MACHINES PROVISIONING AND MIGRATION SERVICES


of virtualized infrastructure, high availability allows virtual machines to
automatically be restarted in case of an underlying hardware failure or
individual VM failure. If one of your servers fails, the VMs will be restarted
on other virtualized servers in the resource pool, restoring the essential services
with minimal service interruption.
5.2.6
Cloud and Virtualization Standardization Efforts
Standardization is important to ensure interoperability between virtualization
mangement vendors, the virtual machines produced by each one of them, and
cloud computing. Here, we will have look at the prevalent standards that
make cloud computing and virtualization possible. In the past few years,
virtualization standardization efforts led by the Distributed Management
Task Force (DMTF) have produced standards for almost all the aspects of
virtualization technology. DMTF initiated the VMAN (Virtualization Man-
agement Initiative), which delivers broadly supported interoperability and
portability standards for managing the virtual computing lifecycle. VMAN’s
OVF (Open Virtualization Format) in a collaboration between industry key
players: Dell, HP, IBM, Microsoft, XenSource, and Vmware. OVF speciﬁca-
tion provides a common format to package and securely distribute virtual
appliances across multiple virtualization platforms. VMAN proﬁles deﬁne a
consistent way of managing a heterogeneous virtualized environment [17].
5.2.7
OCCI and OGF
Another standardization effort has been initiated by Open Grid Forum (OGF)
through organizing an ofﬁcial new working group to deliver a standard API for
cloud IaaS, the Open Cloud Computing Interface Working Group (OCCI-
WG). This group is dedicated for delivering an API speciﬁcation for the remote
management of cloud computing’s infrastructure and for allowing the devel-
opment of interoperable tools for common tasks including deployment,
autonomic scaling, and monitoring. The scope of the speciﬁcation will be
covering a high-level functionality required for managing the life-cycle virtual
machines (or workloads), running on virtualization technologies (or contain-
ers), and supporting service elasticity. The new API for interfacing “IaaS”
cloud computing facilities will allow [18]:
 Consumers to interact with cloud computing infrastructure on an ad hoc
basis.
 Integrators to offer advanced management services.
 Aggregators to offer a single common interface to multiple providers.
 Providers to offer a standard interface that is compatible with the
available tools.
5.2
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
129


 Vendors of grids/clouds to offer standard interfaces for dynamically
scalable service’s delivery in their products.
5.3
VIRTUAL MACHINES PROVISIONING AND MANAGEABILITY
In this section, we will have an overview on the typical life cycle of VM and its
major possible states of operation, which make the management and automa-
tion of VMs in virtual and cloud environments easier than in traditional
computing environments.
As shown in Figure 5.3, the cycle starts by a request delivered to the IT
department, stating the requirement for creating a new server for a particular
service. This request is being processed by the IT administration to start seeing
the servers’ resource pool, matching these resources with the requirements, and
starting the provision of the needed virtual machine. Once it is provisioned
and started, it is ready to provide the required service according to an SLA, or a
time period after which the virtual is being released; and free resources, in this
case, won’t be needed.
Release Ms
VMs In Operation
VM Provision
IT Service Request
• End of service
• Compute resources
 deallocated to other VMs
• Serving web requests
• Migration services
• Scal on-demand
 compute resources
• Infrastructure
 Requirements Analysis
• IT request
• Load OS  Appliances
• Customize and Configure
• Start the server
FIGURE 5.3. Virtual machine life cycle.
130
VIRTUAL MACHINES PROVISIONING AND MIGRATION SERVICES


5.3.1
VM Provisioning Process
Provisioning a virtual machine or server can be explained and illustrated as in
Figure 5.4:
Steps to Provision VM. Here, we describe the common and normal steps of
provisioning a virtual server:
 Firstly, you need to select a server from a pool of available servers
(physical servers with enough capacity) along with the appropriate OS
template you need to provision the virtual machine.
 Secondly, you need to load the appropriate software (operating system
you selected in the previous step, device drivers, middleware, and the
needed applications for the service required).
 Thirdly, you need to customize and conﬁgure the machine (e.g., IP
address, Gateway) to conﬁgure an associated network and storage
resources.
 Finally, the virtual server is ready to start with its newly loaded software.
Typically, these are the tasks required or being performed by an IT or a data
center’s specialist to provision a particular virtual machine.
To summarize, server provisioning is deﬁning server’s conﬁguration based on
the organization requirements, a hardware, and software component (proces-
sor, RAM, storage, networking, operating system, applications, etc.). Nor-
mally, virtual machines can be provisioned by manually installing an operating
system, by using a preconﬁgured VM template, by cloning an existing VM, or
by importing a physical server or a virtual server from another hosting
platform. Physical servers can also be virtualized and provisioned using P2V
(physical to virtual) tools and techniques (e.g., virt-p2v).
After creating a virtual machine by virtualizing a physical server, or by
building a new virtual server in the virtual environment, a template can be
created out of it. Most virtualization management vendors (VMware, XenServer,
etc.) provide the data center’s administration with the ability to do such tasks in
Servers Pool
Load OS and
Appliances
Customize and
Configure
Install Patches
Start the Server
Running Provisioned VM
Appliances
Repository
FIGURE 5.4. Virtual machine provision process.
5.3
VIRTUAL MACHINES PROVISIONING AND MANAGEABILITY
131


an easy way. Provisioning from a template is an invaluable feature, because it
reduces the time required to create a new virtual machine.
Administrators can create different templates for different purposes. For
example, you can create a Windows 2003 Server template for the ﬁnance
department, or a Red Hat Linux template for the engineering department. This
enables the administrator to quickly provision a correctly conﬁgured virtual
server on demand.
This ease and ﬂexibility bring with them the problem of virtual machine’s
sprawl, where virtual machines are provisioned so rapidly that documenting
and managing the virtual machine’s life cycle become a challenge [9].
5.4
VIRTUAL MACHINE MIGRATION SERVICES
Migration service, in the context of virtual machines, is the process of moving a
virtual machine from one host server or storage location to another; there are
different techniques of VM migration, hot/life migration, cold/regular migra-
tion, and live storage migration of a virtual machine [20]. In this process, all key
machines’ components, such as CPU, storage disks, networking, and memory,
are completely virtualized, thereby facilitating the entire state of a virtual
machine to be captured by a set of easily moved data ﬁles. We will cover some
of the migration’s techniques that most virtualization tools provide as a feature.
5.4.1
Migrations Techniques
Live Migration and High Availability. Live migration (which is also called
hot or real-time migration) can be deﬁned as the movement of a virtual
machine from one physical host to another while being powered on. When it is
properly carried out, this process takes place without any noticeable effect from
the end user’s point of view (a matter of milliseconds). One of the most
signiﬁcant advantages of live migration is the fact that it facilitates proactive
maintenance in case of failure, because the potential problem can be resolved
before the disruption of service occurs. Live migration can also be used for load
balancing in which work is shared among computers in order to optimize the
utilization of available CPU resources.
Live Migration Anatomy, Xen Hypervisor Algorithm. In this section we
will explain live migration’s mechanism and how memory and virtual machine
states are being transferred, through the network, from one host A to another
host B [21]; the Xen hypervisor is an example for this mechanism. The logical
steps that are executed when migrating an OS are summarized in Figure 5.5. In
this research, the migration process has been viewed as a transactional
interaction between the two hosts involved:
Stage 0: Pre-Migration. An active virtual machine exists on the physical
host A.
132
VIRTUAL MACHINES PROVISIONING AND MIGRATION SERVICES


Stage 1: Reservation. A request is issued to migrate an OS from host A to
host B (a precondition is that the necessary resources exist on B and on a
VM container of that size).
Stage 2: Iterative Pre-Copy. During the ﬁrst iteration, all pages are
transferred from A to B. Subsequent iterations copy only those pages
dirtied during the previous transfer phase.
Stage 3: Stop-and-Copy. Running OS instance at A is suspended, and its
network trafﬁc is redirected to B. As described in reference 21, CPU state
and any remaining inconsistent memory pages are then transferred. At
the end of this stage, there is a consistent suspended copy of the VM at
both A and B. The copy at A is considered primary and is resumed in case
of failure.
Stage 4: Commitment. Host B indicates to A that it has successfully received
a consistent OS image. Host A acknowledges this message as a commit-
ment of the migration transaction. Host A may now discard the original
VM, and host B becomes the primary host.
Stage 5: Activation. The migrated VM on B is now activated. Post-migration
code runs to reattach the device’s drivers to the new machine and
advertise moved IP addresses.
Active VM on Host A
Alternate physical host may be preselected for migration
Block devices mirrored and free resources maintained
VM running normally on
Host A
VM running normally on
Host B
Overhead due to copying
Downtime
(VM Out of Service)
Initialize a container on the target host
Suspend VM on host A
Generate ARP to redirect traffic to Host B
Synchronize all remaining VM state to Host B
Enable shadow paging
Copy dirty pages in successive rounds.
Stage 0: Pre-Migration
Stage 1: Reservation
Stage 3: Stop and copy
VM state on Host A is released
Stage 4: Commitment
VM starts on Host B
Connects to local devices
resumes normal operation
Stage 5: Activation
Stage 2: Iterative Pre-copy
FIGURE 5.5. Live migration timeline [21].
5.4
VIRTUAL MACHINE MIGRATION SERVICES
133


This approach to failure management ensures that at least one host has a
consistent VM image at all times during migration. It depends on the
assumption that the original host remains stable until the migration commits
and that the VM may be suspended and resumed on that host with no risk of
failure. Based on these assumptions, a migration request essentially attempts to
move the VM to a new host and on any sort of failure, execution is resumed
locally, aborting the migration.
Live Migration Effect on a Running Web Server. Clark et al. [21] did
evaluate the above migration on an Apache 1.3 Web server; this served static
content at a high rate, as illustrated in Figure 5.6. The throughput is achieved
when continuously serving a single 512-kB ﬁle to a set of one hundred
concurrent clients. The Web server virtual machine has a memory allocation of
800 MB. At the start of the trace, the server achieves a consistent throughput
of approximately 870 Mbit/sec. Migration starts 27 sec into the trace, but is
initially rate-limited to 100 Mbit/sec (12% CPU), resulting in server’s through-
put drop to 765 Mbit/sec. This initial low-rate pass transfers 776 MB and lasts
for 62 sec. At this point, the migration’s algorithm, described in Section 5.4.1,
increases its rate over several iterations and ﬁnally suspends the VM after a
further 9.8 sec. The ﬁnal stop-and-copy phase then transfers the remaining
pages, and the Web server resumes at full rate after a 165-msec outage.
This simple example demonstrates that a highly loaded server can be
migrated with both controlled impact on live services and a short downtime.
However, the working set of the server, in this case, is rather small. So, this
should be expected as a relatively easy case of live migration.
Live Migration Vendor Implementations Examples. There are lots of
VM management and provisioning tools that provide the live migration
of VM facility, two of which are VMware VMotion and Citrix XenServer
“XenMotion.”
870 Mbit/sec
165 ms total downtime
Sample over 100 ms
Sample over 500 ms
512 kb files
100 concurrent clients
Throughput (Mbit/sec)
1000
800
600
400
200
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Elapsed time (secs)
Effect of Migration on Web Server Transmission Rate
765 Mbit/sec
694 Mbit/sec
9.8 secs
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
1 st precopy, 62 secs
further iterations
FIGURE 5.6. Results of migrating a running Web server VM [21].
134
VIRTUAL MACHINES PROVISIONING AND MIGRATION SERVICES


VMware Vmotion. This allows users to (a) automatically optimize and
allocate an entire pool of resources for maximum hardware utilization,
ﬂexibility, and availability and (b) perform hardware’s maintenance without
scheduled downtime along with migrating virtual machines away from failing
or underperforming servers [22].
Citrix XenServer XenMotion. This is a nice feature of the Citrix XenServer
product, inherited from the Xen live migrate utility, which provides the IT
administrator with the facility to move a running VM from one XenServer to
another in the same pool without interrupting the service (hypothetically for
zero-downtime server maintenance, which actually takes minutes), making it a
highly available service. This also can be a good feature to balance the
workloads on the virtualized environment [23].
Regular/Cold Migration. Cold migration is the migration of a powered-off
virtual machine. With cold migration, you have the option of moving the
associated disks from one data store to another. The virtual machines are not
required to be on a shared storage. It’s important to highlight that the two main
differences between live migration and cold migration are that live migration
needs a shared storage for virtual machines in the server’s pool, but cold
migration does not; also, in live migration for a virtual machine between two
hosts, there would be certain CPU compatibility checks to be applied; while in
cold migration this checks do not apply. The cold migration process is simple to
implement (as the case for the VMware product), and it can be summarized as
follows [24]:
 The conﬁguration ﬁles, including the NVRAM ﬁle (BIOS settings), log
ﬁles, as well as the disks of the virtual machine, are moved from the source
host to the destination host’s associated storage area.
 The virtual machine is registered with the new host.
 After the migration is completed, the old version of the virtual machine is
deleted from the source host.
Live Storage Migration of Virtual Machine. This kind of migration con-
stitutes moving the virtual disks or conﬁguration ﬁle of a running virtual
machine to a new data store without any interruption in the availability of the
virtual machine’s service. For more details about how this option is working in
a VMware product, see reference 20.
5.4.2
VM Migration, SLA and On-Demand Computing
As we discussed, virtual machines’ migration plays an important role in data
centers by making it easy to adjust resource’s priorities to match resource’s
demand conditions.
5.4
VIRTUAL MACHINE MIGRATION SERVICES
135


This role is completely going in the direction of meeting SLAs; once it has
been detected that a particular VM is consuming more than its fair share of
resources at the expense of other VMs on the same host, it will be eligible, for
this machine, to either be moved to another underutilized host or assign more
resources for it, in case that the host machine still has resources; this in turn will
highly avoid the violations of the SLA and will also, fulﬁll the requirements of
on-demand computing resources. In order to achieve such goals, there should
be an integration between virtualization’s management tools (with its migra-
tions and performance’s monitoring capabilities), and SLA’s management tools
to achieve balance in resources by migrating and monitoring the workloads,
and accordingly, meeting the SLA.
5.4.3
Migration of Virtual Machines to Alternate Platforms
One of the nicest advantages of having facility in data center’s technologies is to
have the ability to migrate virtual machines from one platform to another;
there are a number of ways for achieving this, such as depending on the source
and target virtualization’s platforms and on the vendor’s tools that manage this
facility—for example, the VMware converter that handles migrations between
ESX hosts; the VMware server; and the VMware workstation. The VMware
converter can also import from other virtualization platforms, such as Micro-
soft virtual server machines [9].
5.5
VM PROVISIONING AND MIGRATION IN ACTION
Now, it is time to get into business with a real example of how we can manage
the life cycle, provision, and migrate a virtual machine by the help of one
of the open source frameworks used to manage virtualized infrastructure. Here,
we will use ConVirt [25] (open source framework for the management of open
source virtualization like Xen [26] and KVM [27], known previously as
XenMan).
Deployment Scenario. ConVirt deployment consists of at least one ConVirt
workstation, where ConVirt is installed and ran, which provides the main
console for managing the VM life cycle, managing images, provisioning new
VMs, monitoring machine resources, and so on. There are two essential
deployment scenarios for ConVirt: A, basic conﬁguration in which the Xen
or KVM virtualization platform is on the local machine, where ConVirt is
already installed; B, an advanced conﬁguration in which the Xen or KVM is on
one or more remote servers. The scenario in use here is the advanced one. In
data centers, it is very common to install centralized management software
(ConVirt here) on a dedicated machine for use in managing remote servers
in the data center. In our example, we will use this dedicated machine
where ConVirt is installed and used to manage a pool of remote servers
(two machines). In order to use advanced features of ConVirt (e.g., live
136
VIRTUAL MACHINES PROVISIONING AND MIGRATION SERVICES


migration), you should set up a shared storage for the server pool in use on
which the disks of the provisioned virtual machines are stored. Figure 5.7
illustrates the scenario.
Installation. The installation process involves the following:
 Installing ConVirt on at least one computer. See reference 28 for
installation details.
 Preparing each managed server to be managed by ConVirt. See reference 28
for managed servers’ installation details. We have two managing servers
with the following Ips (managed server 1, IP:172.16.2.22; and managed
server 2, IP:172.16.2.25) as shown in the deployment diagram (Figure 5.7).
 Starting ConVirt and discovering the managed servers you have prepared.
Notes
 Try to follow the installation steps existing in reference 28 according to the
distribution of the operating system in use. In our experiment, we use
Ubuntu 8.10 in our setup.
 Make sure that the managed servers include Xen or KVM hypervisors
installed.
 Make sure that you can access managed servers from your ConVirt
management console through SSH.
Management Server 2
IP:172.16.2.25
Shared
Storage
iSCSi or NFS
Management Console
Management Server 1
IP:172.16.2.22
FIGURE 5.7. A deployment scenario network diagram.
5.5
VM PROVISIONING AND MIGRATION IN ACTION
137


Environment, Software, and Hardware. ConVirt 1.1, Linux Ubuntu 8.10,
three machines, Dell core 2 due processor, 4G RAM.
Adding Managed Servers and Provisioning VM. Once the installation is
done and you are ready to manage your virtual infrastructure, then you can
start the ConVirt management console (see Figure 5.8):
Select any of servers’ pools existing (QA Lab in our scenario) and on its
context menu, select “Add Server.”
 You will be faced with a message asking about the virtualization platform
you want to manage (Xen or KVM), as shown in Figure 5.9:
 Choose KVM, and then enter the managed server information and
credentials (IP, username, and password) as shown in Figure 5.10.
 Once the server is synchronized and authenticated with the manage-
ment console, it will appear in the left pane/of the ConVirt, as shown in
Figure 5.11.
 Select this server, and start provisioning your virtual machine as in
Figure 5.12:
 Fill in the virtual machine’s information (name, storage, OS template, etc.;
Figure 5.13); then you will ﬁnd it created on the managed server tree
powered-off.
Note: While provisioning your virtual machine, make sure that you create
disks on the shared storage (NFS or iSCSi). You can do so by selecting
FIGURE 5.8. Adding managed server on the data centre’s management console.
138
VIRTUAL MACHINES PROVISIONING AND MIGRATION SERVICES


FIGURE 5.9. Select virtualization platform.
FIGURE 5.10. Managed server info and credentials.
5.5
VM PROVISIONING AND MIGRATION IN ACTION
139
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>


FIGURE 5.11. Managed server has been added.
FIGURE 5.12. Provision a virtual machine.
140
VIRTUAL MACHINES PROVISIONING AND MIGRATION SERVICES


the “provisioning” tab, and changing the VM_DISKS_DIR to point to the
location of your shared NFS.
 Start your VM (Figures 5.14 and 5.15), and make sure the installation
media of the operating system you need is placed in drive, in order to use it
for booting the new VM and proceed in the installation process; then start
the installation process as shown in Figure 5.16.
 Once the installation ﬁnishes, you can access your provisioned virtual
machine from the consol icon on the top of your ConVirt management
console.
 Reaching this step, you have created your ﬁrst managed server and
provisioned virtual machine. You can repeat the same procedure to add
the second managed server in your pool to be ready for the next step of
migrating one virtual machine from one server to the other.
5.5.1
VM Life Cycle and VM Monitoring
You can notice through working with ConVirt that you are able to manage the
whole life cycle of the virtual machine; start, stop, reboot, migrate, clone, and so
on.Also, younoticedhow easy itis tomonitortheresourcesof themanagedserver
and to monitor the virtual machine’s guests that help you balance and control the
load on these managed servers once needed. In the next section, we are going to
discuss how easy it is to migrate a virtual machine from host to host.
FIGURE 5.13. Conﬁguring virtual machine.
5.5
VM PROVISIONING AND MIGRATION IN ACTION
141


FIGURE 5.14. Provisioned VM ready to be started.
FIGURE 5.15. Provisioned VM started.
142
VIRTUAL MACHINES PROVISIONING AND MIGRATION SERVICES


5.5.2
Live Migration
ConVirt tool allows running virtual machines to be migrated from one server
to another [29].This feature makes it possible to organize the virtual machine to
physical machine relationship to balance the workload; for example, a VM
needing more CPU can be moved to a machine having available CPU cycles,
or, in other cases, like taking the host machine for maintenance. For proper
VM migration the following points must be considered [29]:
 Shared storage for all Guest OS disks (e.g., NFS, or iSCSI).
 Identical mount points on all servers (hosts).
 The kernel and ramdisk when using para-virtualized virtual machines
should, also, be shared. (This is not required, if pygrub is used.)
 Centrally accessible installation media (iso).
 It is preferable to use identical machines with the same version of
virtualization platform.
 Migration needs to be done within the same subnet.
Migration Process in ConVirt
 To start the migration of a virtual machine from one host to the other,
select it and choose a migrating virtual machine, as shown in Figure 5.17.
 You will have a window containing all the managed servers in your data
center (as shown in Figure 5.18). Choose one as a destination and start
FIGURE 5.16. VM booting from the installation CD to start the installation process.
5.5
VM PROVISIONING AND MIGRATION IN ACTION
143


migration, or drag the VM and drop it on to another managed server to
initiate migration.
 Once the virtual machine has been successfully placed and migrated to
the destination host, you can see it still living and working (as shown in
Figure 5.19).
FIGURE 5.18. Select the destination managed server candidate for migration.
FIGURE 5.17. VM migration.
144
VIRTUAL MACHINES PROVISIONING AND MIGRATION SERVICES


5.5.3
Final Thoughts about the Example
This is just a demonstrating example of how to provision and migrate virtual
machines; however, there are more tools and vendors that offer virtual infra-
structure’s management like Citrix XenServer, VMware vSphere, and so on.
5.6
PROVISIONING IN THE CLOUD CONTEXT
In the cloud context, we shall discuss systems that provide the virtual machine
provisioning and migration services; Amazon EC2 is a widely known example
for vendors that provide public cloud services. Also, Eucalyptus and Open-
Nebula are two complementary and enabling technologies for open source
cloud tools, which play an invaluable role in infrastructure as a service and in
building private, public, and hybrid cloud architecture.
Eucalyptus is a system for implementing on-premise private and hybrid clouds
using the hardware and software’s infrastructure, which is in place without
modiﬁcation. The current interface to Eucalyptus is compatible with Amazon’s
EC2, S3, and EBS interfaces, but the infrastructure is designed to support
multiple client-side interfaces. Eucalyptus is implemented using commonly
available Linux tools and basic Web service’s technologies [30]. Eucalyptus
adds capabilities, such as end-user customization, self-service provisioning, and
legacy application support to data center’s virtualization’s features, making the
IT customer’s service easier [11]. On the other hand, OpenNebula is a virtual
FIGURE 5.19. VM started on the destination server after migration.
5.6
PROVISIONING IN THE CLOUD CONTEXT
145


infrastructure manager that orchestrates storage, network, and virtualization
technologies to enable the dynamic placement of multi-tier services on distrib-
uted infrastructures, combining both data center’s resources and remote cloud’s
resources according to allocation’s policies. OpenNebula provides internal cloud
administration and user’s interfaces for the full management of the cloud’s
platform.
5.6.1
Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud
The Amazon EC2 (Elastic Compute Cloud) is a Web service that allows
users to provision new machines into Amazon’s virtualized infrastructure in a
matter of minutes; using a publicly available API (application programming
interface), it reduces the time required to obtain and boot a new server. Users
get full root access and can install almost any OS or application in their AMIs
(Amazon Machine Images). Web services APIs allow users to reboot their
instances remotely, scale capacity quickly, and use on-demand service when
needed; by adding tens, or even hundreds, of machines. It is very important to
mention that there is no up-front hardware setup and there are no installation
costs, because Amazon charges only for the capacity you actually use.
EC2 instance is typically a virtual machine with a certain amount of RAM,
CPU, and storage capacity.
Setting up an EC2 instance is quite easy. Once you create your AWS
(Amazon Web service) account, you can use the on-line AWS console, or
simply download the ofﬂine command line’s tools to start provisioning your
instances.
Amazon EC2 provides its customers with three ﬂexible purchasing models to
make it easy for the cost optimization:
 On-Demand instances, which allow you to pay a ﬁxed rate by the hour
with no commitment.
 Reserved instances, which allow you to pay a low, one-time fee and in turn
receive a signiﬁcant discount on the hourly usage charge for that instance.
It ensures that any reserved instance you launch is guaranteed to succeed
(provided that you have booked them in advance). This means that users
of these instances should not be affected by any transient limitations in
EC2 capacity.
 Spot instances, which enable you to bid whatever price you want for
instance capacity, providing for even greater savings, if your applications
have ﬂexible start and end times.
Amazon and Provisioning Services. Amazon provides an excellent set of
tools that help in provisioning service; Amazon Auto Scaling [30] is a set
of command line tools that allows scaling Amazon EC2 capacity up or down
automatically and according to the conditions the end user deﬁnes. This feature
ensures that the number of Amazon EC2 instances can scale up seamlessly
146
VIRTUAL MACHINES PROVISIONING AND MIGRATION SERVICES


during demand spikes to maintain performance and can scale down auto-
matically when loads diminish and become less intensive to minimize the costs.
Auto Scaling service and CloudWatch [31] (a monitoring service for AWS
cloud resources and their utilization) help in exposing functionalities required
for provisioning application services on Amazon EC2.
Amazon Elastic Load Balancer [32] is another service that helps in building
fault-tolerant applications by automatically provisioning incoming application
workload across available Amazon EC2 instances and in multiple availability
zones.
5.6.2
Infrastructure Enabling Technology
Offering infrastructure as a service requires software and platforms that can
manage the Infrastructure that is being shared and dynamically provisioned.
For this, there are three noteworthy technologies to be considered: Eucalyptus,
OpenNebula, and Aneka.
5.6.3
Eucalyptus
Eucalyptus [11] is an open-source infrastructure for the implementation of
cloud computing on computer clusters. It is considered one of the earliest tools
developed as a surge computing (in which data center’s private cloud could
augment its ability to handle workload’s spikes by a design that allows it to
send overﬂow work to a public cloud) tool. Its name is an acronym for “elastic
utility computing architecture for linking your programs to useful systems.”
Here are some of the Eucalyptus features [11]:
 Interface compatibility with EC2, and S3 (both Web service and Query/
REST interfaces).
 Simple installation and deployment.
 Support for most Linux distributions (source and binary packages).
 Support for running VMs that run atop the Xen hypervisor or KVM.
Support for other kinds of VMs, such as VMware, is targeted for future
releases.
 Secure internal communication using SOAP with WS security.
 Cloud administrator’s tool for system’s management and user’s accounting.
 The ability to conﬁgure multiple clusters each with private internal
network addresses into a single cloud.
Eucalyptus aims at fostering the research in models for service’s provisioning,
scheduling, SLA formulation, and hypervisors’ portability.
Eucalyptus Architecture. Eucalyptusarchitecture,asillustratedinFigure5.20,
constitutes each high-level system’s component as a stand-alone Web service with
the following high-level components [11].
5.6
PROVISIONING IN THE CLOUD CONTEXT
147


 Node controller (NC) controls the execution, inspection, and termination
of VM instances on the host where it runs.
 Cluster controller (CC) gathers information about and schedules VM
execution on speciﬁc node controllers, as well as manages virtual instance
network.
 Storage controller (SC) is a put/get storage service that implements
Amazon’s S3 interface and provides a way for storing and accessing
VM images and user data.
 Cloud controller (CLC) is the entry point into the cloud for users and
administrators. It queries node managers for information about resources,
makes high-level scheduling decisions, and implements them by making
requests to cluster controllers.
 Walrus (W) is the controller component that manages access to the
storage services within Eucalyptus. Requests are communicated to Walrus
using the SOAP or REST-based interface.
Client-side API Translator
Client-side Interface (via network)
Database
Cloud Controller
Cluster Controller
Storage Controller
(EBS)
Node Controller
Walrus (S3)
FIGURE 5.20. Eucalyptus high-level architecture.
148
VIRTUAL MACHINES PROVISIONING AND MIGRATION SERVICES


Its design is an open and elegant one. It can be very beneﬁcial in testing and
debugging purposes before deploying it on a real cloud. For more details about
Eucalyptus architecture and design, check reference 11.
Ubuntu Enterprise Cloud and Eucalyptus. Ubuntu Enterprise Cloud
(UEC) [33] is a new initiative by Ubuntu to make it easier to provision, deploy,
conﬁgure, and use cloud infrastructures based on Eucalyptus. UEC brings
Amazon EC2-like infrastructure’s capabilities inside the ﬁrewall.
This is by far the simplest way to install and try Eucalyptus. Just download
the Ubuntu server version and install it wherever you want. UEC is also the
ﬁrst open source project that lets you create cloud services in your local
environment easily and leverage the power of cloud computing.
5.6.4
VM Dynamic Management Using OpenNebula
OpenNebula [12] is an open and ﬂexible tool that ﬁts into existing data center’s
environments to build any type of cloud deployment. OpenNebula can be
primarily used as a virtualization tool to manage your virtual infrastructure,
which is usually referred to as private cloud. OpenNebula supports a hybrid
cloud to combine local infrastructure with public cloud-based infrastructure,
enabling highly scalable hosting environments. OpenNebula also supports
public clouds by providing cloud’s interfaces to expose its functionality for
virtual machine, storage, and network management. OpenNebula is one of the
technologies being enhanced in the Reservoir Project [14], European research
initiatives in virtualized infrastructures, and cloud computing.
OpenNebula architecture is shown in Figure 5.21, which illustrates the
existence of public and private clouds and also the resources being managed by
its virtual manager.
OpenNebula is an open-source alternative to these commercial tools for
the dynamic management of VMs on distributed resources. This tool is
supporting several research lines in advance reservation of capacity, probabil-
istic admission control, placement optimization, resource models for the
efﬁcient management of groups of virtual machines, elasticity support, and
so on. These research lines address the requirements from both types of clouds
namely, private and public.
OpenNebula and Haizea. Haizea is an open-source virtual machine-based
lease management architecture developed by Sotomayor et al. [34]; it can be
used as a scheduling backend for OpenNebula. Haizea uses leases as a funda-
mental resource provisioning abstraction and implements those leases as virtual
machines, taking into account the overhead of using virtual machines when
scheduling leases. Haizea also provides advanced functionality such as [35]:
 Advance reservation of capacity.
 Best-effort scheduling with backﬁlling.
5.6
PROVISIONING IN THE CLOUD CONTEXT
149


 Resource preemption (using VM suspend/resume/migrate).
 Policy engine, allowing developers to write pluggable scheduling policies
in Python.
5.6.5
Aneka
Manjrasoft Aneka [10] is a .NET-based platform and framework designed for
building and deploying distributed applications on clouds. It provides a set of
APIs for transparently exploiting distributed resources and expressing the
business logic of applications by using the preferred programming abstractions.
Aneka is also a market-oriented cloud platform since it allows users to build and
schedule applications, provision resources, and monitor results using pricing,
accounting, and QoS/SLA services in private and/or public cloud environments.
It allows end users to build an enterprise/private cloud setup by exploiting
the power of computing resources in the enterprise data centers, public clouds
such as Amazon EC2 [4], and hybrid clouds by combining enterprise private
clouds managed by Aneka with resources from Amazon EC2 or other
enterprise clouds built and managed using technologies such as XenServer.
Aneka also provides support for deploying and managing clouds. By using
its Management Studio and a set of Web interfaces, it is possible to set up either
public or private clouds, monitor their status, update their conﬁguration, and
perform the basic management operations.
Aneka Architecture. Aneka platform architecture [10], as illustrated in
Figure 5.22, consists of a collection of physical and virtualized resources
Cloud User
Interface
Local User and
Administrator Interface
Virtual Infrastructure Manager
Scheduler
Virtualization
Storage
Local Infrastructure
Network
Cloud
Public
Cloud
Cloud Service
FIGURE 5.21. OpenNebula high-level architecture [14].
150
VIRTUAL MACHINES PROVISIONING AND MIGRATION SERVICES


connected through a network. Each of these resources hosts an instance of the
Aneka container representing the runtime environment where the distributed
applications are executed. The container provides the basic management
features of the single node and leverages all the other operations on the services
that it is hosting. The services are broken up into fabric, foundation, and
execution services. Fabric services directly interact with the node through the
platform abstraction layer (PAL) and perform hardware proﬁling and dynamic
resource provisioning. Foundation services identify the core system of the
Aneka middleware, providing a set of basic features to enable Aneka containers
to perform specialized and speciﬁc sets of tasks. Execution services directly deal
with the scheduling and execution of applications in the cloud.
5.7
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
Virtual machine provision and migration services take their place in research to
achieve the best out of its objectives, and here is a list of potential areas’
candidates for research:
 Self-adaptive and dynamic data center.
Data centers exist in the premises of any hosting or ISPs that host different
Web sites and applications. These sites are being accessed at different timing
pattern (morning hours, afternoon, etc.). Thus, workloads against these sites
need to be tracked because they vary dynamically over time. The sizing of host
machines (the number of virtual machines that host these applications)
represents a challenge, and there is a potential research area over here to study
the performance impact and overhead due to this dynamic creation of virtual
machines hosted in these self-adaptive data centers, in order to manage Web
sites properly.
Study of the performance in this dynamic environment will also tackle the
the balance that should be exist between a rapid response time of individual
applications, the overall performance of the data, and the high availability of
the applications and its services.
 Performance
evaluation
and
workload
characterization
of
virtual
workloads.
It is very invaluable in any virtualized infrastructure to have a notion about
the workload provisioned in each VM, the performance’s impacts due to the
hypervisors layer, and the overhead due to consolidated workloads for such
systems; but yet, this is not a deterministic process. Single-workload benchmark
is useful in quantifying the virtualization overhead within a single VM, but not
useful in a whole virtualized environment with multiple isolated VMs with
varying workloads on each, leading to the inability of capturing the system’s
5.7
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
151


behavior. So, there is a big need for a common workload model and methodo-
logy for virtualized systems; thus benchmark’s results can be compared across
different platforms. It will help in the dynamic workload’s relocation and
migrations’ services.
 One of the potential areas that worth study and investigation is the
development
of
fundamental
tools
and
techniques
that
facilitate
the integration and provisioning of distributed and hybrid clouds in
Application
Management Kit
APIs
Task
Model
Membership
Services
Reservation
Services
Storage
Services
Dynamic Resource Provisioning Services
.NET @ Windows
Mono @ Linux
Physical Machines/Virtual Machines
Hardware Profile Services
License
Services
Accounting
Services
Thread
Model
Map Reduce
Model
Security
Persistence
Other
Models
Design
Explorer
Management
Studio
Administration
Portal
SLA-Negotiation
Web Services
Management
Web Services
Software Development Kit
Programming Models
Foundation Services
Fabric Services
Private Cloud
Data Center
Microsoft
Amazon
Google
IBM
LAN network
Infrastructure
Container
FIGURE 5.22. Manjras oft Aneka layered architecture [10].
152
VIRTUAL MACHINES PROVISIONING AND MIGRATION SERVICES


federated way, which is critical for enabling of composition and deploy-
ment of elastic application services [35, 36].
 High-performance data scaling in private and public cloud environments.
Organizations and enterprises that adopt the cloud computing architectures
can face lots of challenges related to (a) the elastic provisioning of compute
clouds on their existing data center’s infrastructure and (b) the inability of the
data layer to scale at the same rate as the compute layer. So, there is a persisting
need for implementing systems that are capable of scaling data with the same
pace as scaling the infrastructure, or to integrate current infrastructure elastic
provisioning systems with existing systems that are designed to scale out the
applications and data layers.
 Performance and high availability in clustered VMs through live
migration.
Clusters are very common in research centers, enterprises, and accordingly in
the cloud. For these clusters to work in a proper way, there are two aspects of
great importance, namely, high availability, and high performance service. This
can be achieved through clusters of virtual machines in which high available
applications can be achieved through the live migration of the virtual machine
to different locations in the cluster or in the cloud. So, the need exists to
(a) study the performance, (b) study the performance’s improvement opportu-
nities with regard to the migrations of these virtual machines, and (c) decide to
which location the machine should be migrated.
 VM scheduling algorithms.
 Accelerating VMs live migration time.
 Cloud-wide VM migration and memory de-duplication.
Normal VM migration is being done within the same physical site location
(campus, data center, lab, etc.). However, migrating virtual machines between
different locations is an invaluable feature to be added to any virtualization
management’s tools. For more details on memory status, storage relocation,
and so on; check the patent pending technology about this topic [37]. Con-
sidering such setup can enable faster and longer-distance VM migrations,
cross-site load balancing, power management, and de-duplicating memory
throughout multiple sites. It is a rich area for research.
 Live migration security.
Live migration security is a very important area of research, because several
security’s vulnerabilities exist; check reference 38 for an empirical exploitation
of live migration.
5.7
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
153


 Extend migration algorithm to allow for priorities.
 Cisco initiative UCS (Uniﬁed Commuting System) and its role in dynamic
just-in-time provisioning of virtual machines and increase of business
agility [39].
5.8
CONCLUSION
Virtual machines’ provisioning and migration are very critical tasks in today’s
virtualized systems, data center’s technology, and accordingly the cloud
computing services.
They have a huge impact on the continuity, and availability of business. In a
few minutes, you can provision a complete server with all its appliances to
perform a particular functionality, or to offer a service. In a few milliseconds,
you can migrate a virtual machine hosted on a physical server within a clustered
environment to a completely different server for the purpose of maintenance,
workloads’ needs, and so on. In this chapter, we covered VM provisioning and
migration services techniques, as well as tools and concepts, and also shed some
light on potential areas for research.
REFERENCES
1.
D. Chisnall, The Deﬁnitive Guide to the Xen Hypervisor, Upper Saddle River, NJ,
Prentice Hall, 2008.
2.
M. El-Refaey and M. Rizkaa, Virtual systems workload characterization: An
overview, in Proceedings of the 18th IEEE International Workshops on Enabling
Technologies: Infrastructures for Collaborative Enterprises, WETICE 2009, Gro-
ningen, The Netherlands, 29 June1 July 2009.
3.
A. T. Velte, T. J. Velte, and R. Elsenpeter, Cloud Computing: A Practical Approach,
McGraw-Hill, New York, 2010.
4.
Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2), http://aws.amazon.com/ec2/,
March 15, 2010.
5.
Cloud Hosting, Cloud Computing, Hybrid Infrastructure from GoGrid, http://
www.gogrid.com/, March 19, 2010.
6.
JoyentCloud Computing Companies: Domain, Application & Web Hosting
Services, http://www.joyent.com/, March 10, 2010.
7.
Rackspace hosting, http://www.rackspace.com/index.php, March 10, 2010.
8.
AppNexus—Home, http://www.appnexus.com/, March 9, 2010.
9.
FlexiScale cloud computing and hosting: instant Windows and Linux cloud servers
on demand, http://www.ﬂexiscale.com/, March 12, 2010.
10.
C. Vecchiola, X. Chu, and R. Buyya, Aneka: A Software Platform for .NET-based
cloud computing, high speed and large scale scientiﬁc computing, in Advances in
Parallel Computing, W. Gentzsch, L. Grandinetti, G. Joubert (eds.), ISBN: 978-1-
60750-073-5, IOS Press, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2009, pp. 267295.
154
VIRTUAL MACHINES PROVISIONING AND MIGRATION SERVICES


11.
D. Nurmi, R. Wolski, C. Grzegorczyk, G. Obertelli, S. Soman, L. Youseff, D.
Zagorodnov, The Eucalyptus Open-source Cloud-computing System, in Proceed-
ings of 9th IEEE International Symposium on Cluster Computing and the Grid,
Shanghai, China, pp. 124131.
12.
B. Sotomayor, R. Santiago Montero, I. Martı´n Llorente, I. Foster, Capacity
Leasing in Cloud Systems using the OpenNebula Engine (short paper). Workshop
on Cloud Computing and its Applications 2008 (CCA08), October 2223, 2008,
Chicago, Illinois, USA.
13.
P. Gardfja¨ ll, E. Elmroth, L. Johnsson, O. Mulmo, and T. Sandholm, Scalable grid-
wide capacity allocation with the SweGrid Accounting System (SGAS), Concur-
rency and Computation: Practice and Experience, 20(18): 20892122, 2008.
14.
I. M. LIorente, Innovation for cloud infrastructure management in OpenNebula/
RESERVOIR, ETSI Workshop on Grids, Clouds & Service Infrastructures, Sophia
Antipolis, France, December 3, 2009.
15.
B. Rochwerger, J. Caceres, R. S. Montero, D. Breitgand, E. Elmroth, A. Galis,
E. Levy, I. M. Llorente, and K. Nagin, Y. Wolfsthal, The RESERVOIR Model
and architecture for open federated cloud computing, IBM Systems Journal,
Volume 53, Number 4, 2009.
16.
F. Piedad and M. W. Hawkins, High Availability: Design, Techniques, and
Processes, Prentice Hall PTR, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2000.
17.
DMTFVMAN, http://www.dmtf.org/standards/mgmt/vman, March 27, 2010.
18.
OGF Open Cloud Computing Interface Working Group, http://www.occi-wg.org/
doku.php, March 27, 2010.
19.
J. Arrasjid, K. Balachandran, D. Conde, G. Lamb, and S. Kaplan, Deploying the
VMware Infrastructure, The USENIX Association, August 10, 2008.
20.
Live Storage Migration of virtual machine, http://www.vmware.com/technology/
virtual-storage/live-migration.html, August 19, 2009.
21.
C. Clark, K. Fraser, S. Hand, J. G. Hansen, E. Jul, C. Kimpach, I. Pratt, and
W. Warﬁeld, Live migration of virtual machines, in 2nd USENIX Symposium on
Networked Systems, Design and Implementation (NSDI 05), May 2005.
22.
VMware VMotion for Live migration of virtual machines, http://www.vmware
.com/products/vi/vc/vmotion.html, August 19, 2009.
23.
Knowledge Center Home—Citrix Knowledge Center, Article ID: CTX115813
http://support.citrix.com, August 28, 2009.
24.
Cold Migration, http://pubs.vmware.com/vsp40_e/admin/wwhelp/wwhimpl/com-
mon/html/wwhelp.htm#href=c_cold_migration.html#1_10_21_7_1&single=true,
August 20, 2009.
25.
ConVirture: Enterpriseclass management for open source virtualization, http://
www.convirture.com/, August 21, 2009.
26.
S. Crosby, D. E. Williams, and J. Garcia, Virtualization with Xen: Including
XenEnterprise, XenServer, and XenExpress, Syngress Media Inc., ISBN 1-597-
49167-5, 2007.
27.
I. Habib, Virtualization with KVM, Linux Journal, 2008(166):8, February 2008.
28.
Installation—ConVirt,
http://www.convirture.com/wiki/index.php?title=
Installation, March 27, 2010.
REFERENCES
155


29.
VM Migration—ConVirt, http://www.convirture.com/wiki/index.php?title=VM_
Migration, March 25, 2010.
30.
Amazon Auto Scaling Service, http://aws.amazon.com/autoscaling/, March 23,
2010.
31.
Amazon CloudWatch Service, http://aws.amazon.com/cloudwatch/, March 23,
2010.
32.
Amazon Load Balancer Service, http://aws.amazon.com/elasticloadbalancing/.
March 21, 2010.
33.
S. Wardley, E. Goyer, and N. Barcet, Ubuntu Enterprise Cloud Architecture,
http://www.ubuntu.com/cloud/private, March 23, 2010.
34.
B. Sotomayor, K. Keahey, and I. Foster. Combining batch execution and leasing
using virtual machines ACM, in Proceedings of the 17th international Symposium
on High Performance Distributed Computing, New York, 2008, pp. 8796.
35.
I. M. LIorente, The OpenNebula Open Source Toolkit to Build Cloud Infra-
structures, Seminars LinuxWorld NL, Utrecht, The Netherlands, November 5th,
2009.
36.
R. Buyya1, R. Ranjan, and R. N. Calheiros, InterCloud: Utility-Oriented
Federation of Cloud Computing Environments for Scaling of Application Services,
in Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Algorithms and Architectures
for Parallel Processing, ICA3PP 2010, Busan, South Korea, May 2123, 2010.
37.
K. Lawton, Virtualization 3.0: Cloud-wide VM migration and memory de-
duplication,
http://www.trendcaller.com/2009/03/virtualization-30-vm-memory-wan.
html, August 25, 2009.
38.
J. Oberheide, E. Cooke, and F. Jahanian, Empirical exploitation of live virtual
machine migration needs modiﬁcation, http://www.net-security.org/article.php?
id 5 1120, August 29, 2009.
39.
Cisco Uniﬁed Computing System, http://www.cisco.com/go/uniﬁedcomputing,
August 30, 2009.
40.
D. Nurmi, R. Wolski, C. Grzegorczyk, G. Obertelli, S. Soman, L. Youseff, and D.
Zagorodnov. The Eucalyptus open-source cloud-computing system, in Proceedings
of the 9th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster Computing and the Grid
(CCGrid 2009), May 18May 21, 2010, Shanghai, China.
156
VIRTUAL MACHINES PROVISIONING AND MIGRATION SERVICES


CHAPTER 6
ON THE MANAGEMENT OF
VIRTUAL MACHINES FOR CLOUD
INFRASTRUCTURES
IGNACIO M. LLORENTE, RUBE´ N S. MONTERO, BORJA SOTOMAYOR,
DAVID BREITGAND, ALESSANDRO MARASCHINI, ELIEZER LEVY, and
BENNY ROCHWERGER
In 2006, Amazon started offering virtual machines (VMs) to anyone with a
credit card for just $0.10/hour through its Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2)
service. Although not the ﬁrst company to lease VMs, the programmer-friendly
EC2 Web services API and their pay-as-you-go pricing popularized the
“Infrastructure as a Service” (IaaS) paradigm, which is now closely related to
the notion of a “cloud.” Following the success of Amazon EC2 [1], several
other IaaS cloud providers, or public clouds, have emerged—such as Elastic-
Hosts [2], GoGrid [3], and FlexiScale [4]—that provide a publicly accessible
interface for purchasing and managing computing infrastructure that is
instantiated as VMs running on the provider’s data center. There is also a
growing ecosystem of technologies and tools to build private clouds—where in-
house resources are virtualized, and internal users can request and manage
these resources using interfaces similar or equal to those of public clouds—and
hybrid clouds—where an organization’s private cloud can supplement its
capacity using a public cloud.
Thus, within the broader context of cloud computing, this chapter focuses
on the subject of IaaS clouds and, more speciﬁcally, on the efﬁcient manage-
ment of virtual machines in this type of cloud. Section 6.1 starts by discussing
the characteristics of IaaS clouds and the challenges involved in managing these
clouds. The following sections elaborate on some of these challenges, describing
the solutions proposed within the virtual machine management activity of
Cloud Computing: Principles and Paradigms,
Edited by Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg and
Andrzej Goscinski
Copyright r 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
157


RESERVOIR [5] (Resources and Services Virtualization without Barriers), a
European Union FP7-funded project. Section 6.2 starts by discussing the
problem of managing virtual infrastructures; Section 6.3 presents scheduling
techniques that can be used to provide advance reservation of capacity within
these infrastructures; Section 6.4 focuses on service-level agreements (or SLAs)
in IaaS clouds and discusses capacity management techniques supporting SLA
commitments. Finally, the chapter concludes with a discussion of remaining
challenges and future work in IaaS clouds.
6.1
THE ANATOMY OF CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURES
There are many commercial IaaS cloud providers in the market, such as
those cited earlier, and all of them share ﬁve characteristics: (i) They provide
on-demand provisioning of computational resources; (ii) they use virtualization
technologies to lease these resources; (iii) they provide public and simple remote
interfaces to manage those resources; (iv) they use a pay-as-you-go cost model,
typically charging by the hour; and (v) they operate data centers large
enough to provide a seemingly unlimited amount of resources to their clients
(usually touted as “inﬁnite capacity” or “unlimited elasticity”). Private and
hybrid clouds share these same characteristics but, instead of selling capacity
over publicly accessible interfaces, focus on providing capacity to an organiza-
tion’s internal users.
Virtualization technologies have been the key enabler of many of these
salient characteristics of IaaS clouds by giving providers a more ﬂexible and
generic way of managing their resources. Thus, virtual infrastructure (VI)
management—the management of virtual machines distributed across a pool of
physical resources—becomes a key concern when building an IaaS cloud and
poses a number of challenges. Like traditional physical resources, virtual
machines require a fair amount of conﬁguration, including preparation of
the machine’s software environment and network conﬁguration. However,
in a virtual infrastructure, this conﬁguration must be done on-the-ﬂy, with as
little time between the time the VMs are requested and the time they are
available to the user. This is further complicated by the need to conﬁgure
groups of VMs that will provide a speciﬁc service (e.g., an application requiring
a Web server and a database server). Additionally, a virtual infrastructure
manager must be capable of allocating resources efﬁciently, taking into account
an organization’s goals (such as minimizing power consumption and other
operational costs) and reacting to changes in the physical infrastructure.
Virtual infrastructure management in private clouds has to deal with an
additional problem: Unlike large IaaS cloud providers, such as Amazon,
private clouds typically do not have enough resources to provide the illusion
of “inﬁnite capacity.” The immediate provisioning scheme used in public
clouds, where resources are provisioned at the moment they are requested, is
ineffective in private clouds. Support for additional provisioning schemes, such
158
ON THE MANAGEMENT OF VIRTUAL MACHINES FOR CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURES


as best-effort provisioning and advance reservations to guarantee quality of
service (QoS) for applications that require resources at speciﬁc times (e.g.,
during known “spikes” in capacity requirements), is required. Thus, efﬁcient
resource allocation algorithms and policies and the ability to combine both
private and public cloud resources, resulting in a hybrid approach, become even
more important.
Several VI management solutions have emerged over time, such as platform
ISF [6] and VMware vSphere [7], along with open-source initiatives such as
Enomaly Computing Platform [8] and Ovirt [9]. Many of these tools originated
out of the need to manage data centers efﬁciently using virtual machines, before
the Cloud Computing paradigm took off. However, managing virtual infra-
structures in a private/hybrid cloud is a different, albeit similar, problem than
managing a virtualized data center, and existing tools lack several features that
are required for building IaaS clouds. Most notably, they exhibit monolithic
and closed structures and can only operate, if at all, with some preconﬁgured
placement policies, which are generally simple (round robin, ﬁrst ﬁt, etc.) and
based only on CPU speed and utilization of a ﬁxed and predetermined number
of resources, such as memory and network bandwidth. This precludes extend-
ing their resource management strategies with custom policies or integration
with other cloud systems, or even adding cloud interfaces.
Thus, there are still several gaps in existing VI solutions. Filling these gaps
will require addressing a number of research challenges over the next years,
across several areas, such as virtual machine management, resource scheduling,
SLAs, federation of resources, and security. In this chapter, we focus on three
problems addressed by the Virtual Machine Management Activity of RESER-
VOIR: distributed management of virtual machines, reservation-based provi-
sioning of virtualized resource, and provisioning to meet SLA commitments.
6.1.1
Distributed Management of Virtual Machines
The ﬁrst problem is how to manage the virtual infrastructures themselves.
Although resource management has been extensively studied, particularly for
job management in high-performance computing, managing VMs poses addi-
tional problems that do not arise when managing jobs, such as the need to set up
custom software environments for VMs, setting up and managing networking for
interrelated VMs, and reducing the various overheads involved in using VMs.
Thus, VI managers must be able to efﬁciently orchestrate all these different tasks.
The problem of efﬁciently selecting or scheduling computational resources is
well known. However, the state of the art in VM-based resource scheduling
follows a static approach, where resources are initially selected using a greedy
allocation strategy, with minimal or no support for other placement policies.
To efﬁciently schedule resources, VI managers must be able to support ﬂexible
and complex scheduling policies and must leverage the ability of VMs to
suspend, resume, and migrate.
6.1
THE ANATOMY OF CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURES
159


This complex task is one of the core problems that the RESERVOIR project
tries to solve. In Section 6.2 we describe the problem of how to manage VMs
distributed across a pool of physical resources and describe OpenNebula, the
virtual infrastructure manager developed by the RESERVOIR project.
6.1.2
Reservation-Based Provisioning of Virtualized Resources
A particularly interesting problem when provisioning virtual infrastructures is
how to deal with situations where the demand for resources is known before-
hand—for example, when an experiment depending on some complex piece of
equipment is going to run from 2 pm to 4 pm, and computational resources
must be available at exactly that time to process the data produced by the
equipment. Commercial cloud providers, such as Amazon, have enough
resources to provide the illusion of inﬁnite capacity, which means that this
situation is simply resolved by requesting the resources exactly when needed; if
capacity is “inﬁnite,” then there will be resources available at 2 pm.
On the other hand, when dealing with ﬁnite capacity, a different approach is
needed. However, the intuitively simple solution of reserving the resources
beforehand turns out to not be so simple, because it is known to cause
resources to be underutilized [1013], due to the difﬁculty of scheduling other
requests around an inﬂexible reservation.
As we discuss in Section 6.3, VMs allow us to overcome the utilization
problems typically associated with advance reservations and we describe
Haizea, a VM-based lease manager supporting advance reservation along
with other provisioning models not supported in existing IaaS clouds, such
as best-effort provisioning.
6.1.3
Provisioning to Meet SLA Commitments
IaaS clouds can be used to deploy services that will be consumed by users other
than the one that deployed the services. For example, a company might depend
on an IaaS cloud provider to deploy three-tier applications (Web front-end,
application server, and database server) for its customers. In this case, there is a
distinction between the cloud consumer (i.e., the service owner; in this case, the
company that develops and manages the applications) and the end users of
the resources provisioned on the cloud (i.e., the service user; in this case, the
users that access the applications). Furthermore, service owners will enter into
service-level agreements (SLAs) with their end users, covering guarantees such
as the timeliness with which these services will respond.
However, cloud providers are typically not directly exposed to the service
semantics or the SLAs that service owners may contract with their end users.
The capacity requirements are, thus, less predictable and more elastic. The
use of reservations may be insufﬁcient, and capacity planning and optimiza-
tions are required instead. The cloud provider’s task is, therefore, to make sure
that resource allocation requests are satisﬁed with speciﬁc probability and
160
ON THE MANAGEMENT OF VIRTUAL MACHINES FOR CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURES


timeliness. These requirements are formalized in infrastructure SLAs between
the service owner and cloud provider, separate from the high-level SLAs
between the service owner and its end users.
In many cases, either the service owner is not resourceful enough to perform
an exact service sizing or service workloads are hard to anticipate in advance.
Therefore, to protect high-level SLAs, the cloud provider should cater for
elasticity on demand. We argue that scaling and de-scaling of an application is
best managed by the application itself. The reason is that in many cases,
resources allocation decisions are application-speciﬁc and are being driven by
the application level metrics. These metrics typically do not have a universal
meaning and are not observable using black box monitoring of virtual
machines comprising the service.
RESERVOIR proposes a ﬂexible framework where service owners may
register service-speciﬁc elasticity rules and monitoring probes, and these rules
are being executed to match environment conditions. We argue that elasti-
city of the application should be contracted and formalized as part of capacity
availability SLA between the cloud provider and service owner. This poses
interesting research issues on the IaaS side, which can be grouped around two
main topics:
 SLA-oriented capacity planning that guarantees that there is enough
capacity to guarantee service elasticity with minimal over-provisioning.
 Continuous resource placement and scheduling optimization that lowers
operational costs and takes advantage of available capacity transparently
to the service while keeping the service SLAs.
We explore these two topics in further detail in Section 6.4, and we describe
how the RESERVOIR project addresses the research issues that arise therein.
6.2
DISTRIBUTED MANAGEMENT OF VIRTUAL INFRASTRUCTURES
Managing VMs in a pool of distributed physical resources is a key concern in
IaaS clouds, requiring the use of a virtual infrastructure manager. To address
some of the shortcomings in existing VI solutions, we have developed the open
source OpenNebula1 virtual infrastructure engine. OpenNebula is capable of
managing groups of interconnected VMs—with support for the Xen, KVM,
and VMWare platforms—within data centers and private clouds that involve a
large amount of virtual and physical servers. OpenNebula can also be used to
build hybrid clouds by interfacing with remote cloud sites [14]. This section
describes
how
OpenNebula
models
and
manages
VMs
in
a
virtual
infrastructure.
1http://www.opennebula.org
6.2
DISTRIBUTED MANAGEMENT OF VIRTUAL INFRASTRUCTURES
161


6.2.1
VM Model and Life Cycle
The primary target of OpenNebula is to manage VMs. Within OpenNebula, a
VM is modeled as having the following attributes:
 A capacity in terms of memory and CPU.
 A set of NICs attached to one or more virtual networks.
 A set of disk images. In general it might be necessary to transfer some of
these image ﬁles to/from the physical machine the VM will be running in.
 A state ﬁle (optional) or recovery ﬁle that contains the memory image of a
running VM plus some hypervisor-speciﬁc information.
The life cycle of a VM within OpenNebula follows several stages:
 Resource Selection. Once a VM is requested to OpenNebula, a feasible
placement plan for the VM must be made. OpenNebula’s default
scheduler provides an implementation of a rank scheduling policy,
allowing site administrators to conﬁgure the scheduler to prioritize the
resources that are more suitable for the VM, using information from
the VMs and the physical hosts. As we will describe in Section 6.3,
OpenNebula can also use the Haizea lease manager to support more
complex scheduling policies.
 Resource Preparation. The disk images of the VM are transferred to the
target physical resource. During the boot process, the VM is contextua-
lized, a process where the disk images are specialized to work in a given
environment. For example, if the VM is part of a group of VMs offering a
service (a compute cluster, a DB-based application, etc.), contextualiza-
tion could involve setting up the network and the machine hostname, or
registering the new VM with a service (e.g., the head node in a compute
cluster). Different techniques are available to contextualize a worker node,
including use of an automatic installation system (for instance, Puppet or
Quattor), a context server (see reference 15), or access to a disk image with
the context data for the worker node (OVF recommendation).
 VM Creation. The VM is booted by the resource hypervisor.
 VM Migration. The VM potentially gets migrated to a more suitable
resource(e.g.,tooptimizethepowerconsumptionofthephysicalresources).
 VM Termination. When the VM is going to shut down, OpenNebula can
transfer back its disk images to a known location. This way, changes in the
VM can be kept for a future use.
6.2.2
VM Management
OpenNebula manages a VMs life cycle by orchestrating three different
management areas: virtualization by interfacing with a physical resource’s
162
ON THE MANAGEMENT OF VIRTUAL MACHINES FOR CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURES


hypervisor, such as Xen, KVM, or VMWare, to control (e.g., boot, stop, or
shutdown) the VM; image management by transferring the VM images from
an image repository to the selected resource and by creating on-the-ﬂy
temporary images; and networking by creating local area networks (LAN)
to interconnect the VMs and tracking the MAC addresses leased in each
network.
Virtualization. OpenNebula manages VMs by interfacing with the physical
resource virtualization technology (e.g., Xen or KVM) using a set of pluggable
drivers that decouple the managing process from the underlying technology.
Thus, whenever the core needs to manage a VM, it uses high-level commands
such as “start VM,” “stop VM,” and so on, which are translated by the drivers
into commands that the virtual machine manager can understand. By decou-
pling the OpenNebula core from the virtualization technologies through the use
of a driver-based architecture, adding support for additional virtual machine
managers only requires writing a driver for it.
Image Management. VMs are supported by a set of virtual disks or images,
which contains the OS and any other additional software needed by the VM.
OpenNebula assumes that there is an image repository that can be any storage
medium or service, local or remote, that holds the base image of the VMs.
There are a number of different possible conﬁgurations depending on the user’s
needs. For example, users may want all their images placed on a separate
repository with only HTTP access. Alternatively, images can be shared through
NFS between all the hosts. OpenNebula aims to be ﬂexible enough to support
as many different image management conﬁgurations as possible.
OpenNebula uses the following concepts for its image management model
(Figure 6.1):
 Image Repositories refer to any storage medium, local or remote, that hold
the base images of the VMs. An image repository can be a dedicated ﬁle
server or a remote URL from an appliance provider, but they need to be
accessible from the OpenNebula front-end.
 Virtual Machine Directory is a directory on the cluster node where a VM is
running. This directory holds all deployment ﬁles for the hypervisor to
boot the machine, checkpoints, and images being used or saved—all of
them speciﬁc to that VM. This directory should be shared for most
hypervisors to be able to perform live migrations. Any given VM image
goes through the following steps along its life cycle:
 Preparation implies all the necessary changes to be made to the
machine’s image so it is prepared to offer the service to which it is
intended. OpenNebula assumes that the images that conform to a
particular VM are prepared and placed in the accessible image
repository.
6.2
DISTRIBUTED MANAGEMENT OF VIRTUAL INFRASTRUCTURES
163


 Cloning the image means taking the image from the repository and
placing it in the VM’s directory in the physical node where it is going to
be run before the VM is actually booted. If a VM image is to be cloned,
the original image is not going to be used, and thus a copy will be used.
There is a qualiﬁer (clone) for the images that can mark them as
targeting for cloning or not.
 Save/remove. If the save qualiﬁer is disabled, once the VM has been
shut down, the images and all the changes thereof are going to be
disposed of. However, if the save qualiﬁer is activated, the image will be
saved for later use.
Networking. In general, services deployed on a cloud, from a computing
cluster to the classical three-tier business application, require several inter-
related VMs, with a virtual application network (VAN) being the primary link
between them. OpenNebula dynamically creates these VANs and tracks
the MAC addresses leased in the network to the service VMs. Note that here
we refer to layer 2 LANs; other TCP/IP services such as DNS, NIS, or NFS
are the responsibility of the service (i.e., the service VMs have to be conﬁgured
to provide such services).
The physical hosts that will co-form the fabric of our virtual infrastructures
will need to have some constraints in order to effectively deliver virtual
networks to our virtual machines. Therefore, from the point of view of
networking, we can deﬁne our physical cluster as a set of hosts with one or
more network interfaces, each of them connected to a different physical
network.
Image
Repository
FRONT-END
ONED
$ONE_LOCATION/var
Shared FS
VM_DIR
CLUSTER NODE
VM_DIR
CLUSTER NODE
VM_DIR
CLUSTER NODE
FIGURE 6.1. Image management in OpenNebula.
164
ON THE MANAGEMENT OF VIRTUAL MACHINES FOR CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURES
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>


We can see in Figure 6.2 two physical hosts with two network interfaces
each; thus there are two different physical networks. There is one physical
network that connects the two hosts using a switch, and there is another
one that gives the hosts access to the public Internet. This is one possible
conﬁguration for the physical cluster, and it is the one we recommend since
it can be used to make both private and public VANs for the virtual machines.
Moving up to the virtualization layer, we can distinguish three different VANs.
One is mapped on top of the public Internet network, and we can see a couple of
virtual machines taking advantage of it. Therefore, these two VMs will have
access to the Internet. The other two are mapped on top of the private physical
network: the Red and Blue VANs. Virtual machines connected to the same
private VAN will be able to communicate with each other, otherwise they will be
isolated and won’t be able to communicate.
6.2.3
Further Reading on OpenNebula
There are a number of scholarly publications that describe the design and
architecture of OpenNebula in more detail, including papers showing perfor-
mance results obtained when using OpenNebula to deploy and manage the
back-end nodes of a Sun Grid Engine compute cluster [14] and of a NGINX
Web server [16] on both local resources and an external cloud. The Open-
Nebula virtual infrastructure engine is also available for download at http://
www.opennebula.org/, which provides abundant documentation not just on
how to install and use OpenNebula, but also on its internal architecture.
Physical Network
Switch
Virtual LAN–Red
(Ranged)
Virtual LAN–Blue
(Ranged)
Virtual LAN–Public
(Fixed)
02:01:0A:00:01:01
10.0.1.1/24
02:01:0A:00:02:02
10.0.2.2/24
02:01:0A:00:02:01
10.0.2.1/24
02:01:93:60:51:f1
147.96.81.241/24
02:01:0A:00:01:03
10.0.1.3/24
Host A
Host B
Bridge
Bridge
Bridge
Bridge
Internet
VM
VM
VM
VM
VM
FIGURE 6.2. Networkig model for OpenNebula.
6.2
DISTRIBUTED MANAGEMENT OF VIRTUAL INFRASTRUCTURES
165


6.3
SCHEDULING TECHNIQUES FOR ADVANCE
RESERVATION OF CAPACITY
While a VI manager like OpenNebula can handle all the minutiae of managing
VMs in a pool of physical resources, scheduling these VMs efﬁciently is a
different and complex matter. Commercial cloud providers, such as Amazon,
rely on an immediate provisioning model where VMs are provisioned right away,
since their data centers’ capacity is assumed to be inﬁnite. Thus, there is no need
for other provisioning models, such as best-effort provisioning where requests
have to be queued and prioritized or advance provisioning where resources are
pre-reserved so they will be guaranteed to be available at a given time period;
queuing and reservations are unnecessary when resources are always available to
satisfy incoming requests.
However, when managing a private cloud with limited resources, an
immediate provisioning model is insufﬁcient. In this section we describe a
lease-based resource provisioning model used by the Haizea2 lease manager,
which can be used as a scheduling back-end by OpenNebula to support
provisioning models not supported in other VI management solutions. We
focus, in particular, on advance reservation of capacity in IaaS clouds as a way
to guarantee availability of resources at a time speciﬁed by the user.
6.3.1
Existing Approaches to Capacity Reservation
Efﬁcient reservation of resources in resource management systems has been
studied considerably, particularly in the context of job scheduling. In fact, most
modern job schedulers support advance reservation of resources, but their
implementation falls short in several aspects. First of all, they are constrained
by the job abstraction; when a user makes an advance reservation in a job-
based system, the user does not have direct and unfettered access to the
resources, the way a cloud users can access the VMs they requested, but, rather,
is only allowed to submit jobs to them. For example, PBS Pro creates a new
queue that will be bound to the reserved resources, guaranteeing that jobs
submitted to that queue will be executed on them (assuming they have
permission to do so). Maui and Moab, on the other hand, simply allow users
to specify that a submitted job should use the reserved resources (if the
submitting user has permission to do so). There are no mechanisms to directly
login to the reserved resources, other than through an interactive job, which
does not provide unfettered access to the resources.
Additionally, it is well known that advance reservations lead to utilization
problems [1013], caused by the need to vacate resources before a reservation
can begin. Unlike future reservations made by backﬁlling algorithms, where
the start of the reservation is determined on a best-effort basis, advance
2http://haizea.cs.uchicago.edu/
166
ON THE MANAGEMENT OF VIRTUAL MACHINES FOR CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURES


reservations introduce roadblocks in the resource schedule. Thus, traditional
job schedulers are unable to efﬁciently schedule workloads combining both
best-effort jobs and advance reservations.
However, advance reservations can be supported more efﬁciently by using a
scheduler capable of preempting running jobs at the start of the reservation and
resuming them at the end of the reservation. Preemption can also be used to run
large parallel jobs (which tend to have long queue times) earlier, and it is
specially relevant in the context of urgent computing, where resources have to
be provisioned on very short notice and the likelihood of having jobs already
assigned to resources is higher. While preemption can be accomplished trivially
by canceling a running job, the least disruptive form of preemption is
checkpointing, where the preempted job’s entire state is saved to disk, allowing
it to resume its work from the last checkpoint. Additionally, some schedulers
also support job migration, allowing checkpointed jobs to restart on other
available resources, instead of having to wait until the preempting job or
reservation has completed.
However, although many modern schedulers support at least checkpointing-
based preemption, this requires the job’s executable itself to be checkpointable.
An application can be made checkpointable by explicitly adding that function-
ality to an application (application-level and library-level checkpointing) or
transparently by using OS-level checkpointing, where the operating system
(such as Cray, IRIX, and patched versions of Linux using BLCR [17])
checkpoints a process, without rewriting the program or relinking it with
checkpointing libraries. However, this requires a checkpointing-capable OS to
be available.
Thus, a job scheduler capable of checkpointing-based preemption and
migration could be used to checkpoint jobs before the start of an advance
reservation, minimizing their impact on the schedule. However, the application-
and library-level checkpointing approaches burden the user with having to
modify their applications to make them checkpointable, imposing a restriction
on the software environment. OS-level checkpointing, on the other hand, is a
more appealing option, but still imposes certain software restrictions on
resource consumers. Systems like Cray and IRIX still require applications to
be compiled for their respective architectures, which would only allow a small
fraction of existing applications to be supported within leases, or would require
existing applications to be ported to these architectures. This is an excessive
restriction on users, given the large number of clusters and applications that
depend on the x86 architecture. Although the BLCR project does provide a
checkpointing x86 Linux kernel, this kernel still has several limitations, such as
not being able to properly checkpoint network trafﬁc and not being able to
checkpoint MPI applications unless they are linked with BLCR-aware MPI
libraries.
An alternative approach to supporting advance reservations was propo-
sed by Nurmi et al. [18], which introduced “virtual advance reservations
for queues” (VARQ). This approach overlays advance reservations over
6.3
SCHEDULING TECHNIQUES FOR ADVANCE RESERVATION OF CAPACITY
167


traditional job schedulers by ﬁrst predicting the time a job would spend waiting
in a scheduler’s queue and then submitting a job (representing the advance
reservation) at a time such that, based on the wait time prediction, the
probability that it will be running at the start of the reservation is maximized.
Since no actual reservations can be done, VARQ jobs can run on traditional
job schedulers, which will not distinguish between the regular best-effort jobs
and the VARQ jobs. Although this is an interesting approach that can be
realistically implemented in practice (since it does not require modiﬁcations to
existing scheduler), it still depends on the job abstraction.
Hovestadt et al. [19, 20] proposed a planning-based (as opposed to queuing-
based) approach to job scheduling, where job requests are immediately planned
by making a reservation (now or in the future), instead of waiting in a queue.
Thus, advance reservations are implicitly supported by a planning-based
system. Additionally, each time a new request is received, the entire schedule
is reevaluated to optimize resource usage. For example, a request for an
advance reservation can be accepted without using preemption, since the jobs
that were originally assigned to those resources can be assigned to different
resources (assuming the jobs were not already running).
6.3.2
Reservations with VMs
As we described earlier, virtualization technologies are a key enabler of many
features found in IaaS clouds. Virtual machines are also an appealing vehicle
for implementing efﬁcient reservation of resources due to their ability to be
suspended, potentially migrated, and resumed without modifying any of
the applications running inside the VM. However, virtual machines also raise
additional challenges related to the overhead of using VMs:
Preparation Overhead. When using VMs to implement reservations, a VM
disk image must be either prepared on-the-ﬂy or transferred to the
physical node where it is needed. Since a VM disk image can have a
size in the order of gigabytes, this preparation overhead can signiﬁcantly
delay the starting time of leases. This delay may, in some cases, be
unacceptable for advance reservations that must start at a speciﬁc time.
Runtime Overhead. Once a VM is running, scheduling primitives such as
checkpointing and resuming can incur in signiﬁcant overhead since a
VM’s entire memory space must be saved to disk, and then read from
disk. Migration involves transferring this saved memory along with the
VM disk image. Similar to deployment overhead, this overhead can result
in noticeable delays.
The Haizea project (http://haizea.cs.uchicago.edu/) was created to develop a
scheduler that can efﬁciently support advance reservations efﬁciently by using
the suspend/resume/migrate capability of VMs, but minimizing the overhead of
168
ON THE MANAGEMENT OF VIRTUAL MACHINES FOR CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURES


using VMs. The fundamental resource provisioning abstraction in Haizea is the
lease, with three types of lease currently supported:
 Advanced reservation leases, where the resources must be available at a
speciﬁc time.
 Best-effort leases, where resources are provisioned as soon as possible and
requests are placed on a queue if necessary.
 Immediate leases, where resources are provisioned when requested or not
at all.
The Haizea lease manager can be used as a scheduling back-end for the
OpenNebula virtual infrastructure engine, allowing it to support these three
types of leases. The remainder of this section describes Haizea’s leasing model
and the algorithms Haizea uses to schedule these leases.
6.3.3
Leasing Model
We deﬁne a lease as “a negotiated and renegotiable agreement between a
resource provider and a resource consumer, where the former agrees to make
a set of resources available to the latter, based on a set of lease terms presented
by the resource consumer.” The terms must encompass the following: the
hardware resources required by the resource consumer, such as CPUs, memory,
and network bandwidth; a software environment required on the leased
resources; and an availability period during which a user requests that the
hardware and software resources be available. Since previous work and other
authors already explore lease terms for hardware resources and software
environments [21, 22], our focus has been on the availability dimension of a
lease and, in particular, on how to efﬁciently support advance reservations.
Thus, we consider the following availability terms:
 Start time may be unspeciﬁed (a best-effort lease) or speciﬁed (an advance
reservation lease). In the latter case, the user may specify either a speciﬁc
start time or a time period during which the lease start may occur.
 Maximum duration refers to the total maximum amount of time that the
leased resources will be available.
 Leases can be preemptable. A preemptable lease can be safely paused
without disrupting the computation that takes place inside the lease.
Haizea’s resource model considers that it manages W physical nodes capable
of running virtual machines. Each node i has CPUs, megabytes (MB) of
memory, and MB of local disk storage. We assume that all disk images required
to run virtual machines are available in a repository from which they can be
transferred to nodes as needed and that all are connected at a bandwidth of B
MB/sec by a switched network.
6.3
SCHEDULING TECHNIQUES FOR ADVANCE RESERVATION OF CAPACITY
169


A lease is implemented as a set of N VMs, each allocated resources described
by a tuple (p, m, d, b), where p is number of CPUs, m is memory in MB, d is disk
space in MB, and b is network bandwidth in MB/sec. A disk image I with a size
of size(I) MB must be transferred from the repository to a node before the VM
can start. When transferring a disk image to multiple nodes, we use multi-
casting and model the transfer time as size(I)/B. If a lease is preempted, it is
suspended by suspending its VMs, which may then be either resumed on the
same node or migrated to another node and resumed there. Suspending a VM
results in a memory state image ﬁle (of size m that can be saved to either a local
ﬁlesystem or a global ﬁlesystem (f A {local, global}). Resumption requires
reading that image back into memory and then discarding the ﬁle. Suspension
of a single VM is done at a rate of s megabytes of VM memory per second, and
we deﬁne r similarly for VM resumption.
6.3.4
Lease Scheduling
Haizea is designed to process lease requests and determine how those requests
can be mapped to virtual machines, leveraging their suspend/resume/migrate
capability, in such a way that the leases’ requirements are satisﬁed. The
scheduling component of Haizea uses classical backﬁlling algorithms [23],
extended to allow best-effort leases to be preempted if resources have to be
freed up for advance reservation requests. Additionally, to address the pre-
paration and runtime overheads mentioned earlier, the scheduler allocates
resources explicitly for the overhead activities (such as transferring disk images
or suspending VMs) instead of assuming they should be deducted from the
lease’s allocation. Besides guaranteeing that certain operations complete on
time (e.g., an image transfer before the start of a lease), the scheduler also
attempts to minimize this overhead whenever possible, most notably by reusing
disk image transfers and caching disk images on the physical nodes.
Best-effort leases are scheduled using a queue. When a best-effort lease
is requested, the lease request is placed at the end of the queue, which is
periodically evaluated using a backﬁlling algorithm—both aggressive and
conservative backﬁlling strategies [23, 24] are supported—to determine if any
leases can be scheduled. The scheduler does this by ﬁrst checking the earliest
possible starting time for the lease on each physical node, which will depend on
the required disk images. For example, if some physical nodes have cached the
required disk image, it will be possible to start the lease earlier on those nodes.
Once these earliest starting times have been determined, the scheduler chooses
the nodes that allow the lease to start soonest.
The use of VM suspension/resumption allows the best-effort leases to be
scheduled even if there are not enough resources available for their full
requested duration. If there is a “blocking” lease in the future, such as an
advance reservation lease that would prevent the best-effort lease to run to
completion before the blocking lease starts, the best-effort lease can still be
scheduled; the VMs in the best-effort lease will simply be suspended before a
170
ON THE MANAGEMENT OF VIRTUAL MACHINES FOR CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURES


blocking lease. The remainder of a suspended lease is placed in the queue,
according to its submission time, and is scheduled like a regular best-effort lease
(except a resumption operation, and potentially a migration operation, will
have to be scheduled too).
Advance reservations, on the other hand, do not go through a queue,
since they must start at either the requested time or not at all. Thus, scheduling
this type of lease is relatively simple, because it mostly involves checking
if there are enough resources available during the requested interval. However,
the scheduler must also check if any associated overheads can be scheduled
in such a way that the lease can still start on time. For preparation overhead,
the scheduler determines if the required images can be transferred on time.
These transfers are scheduled using an earliest deadline ﬁrst (EDF) algorithm,
where the deadline for the image transfer is the start time of the advance
reservation lease. Since the start time of an advance reservation lease may occur
long after the lease request, we modify the basic EDF algorithm so that
transfers take place as close as possible to the deadline, preventing images from
unnecessarily consuming disk space before the lease starts. For runtime over-
head, the scheduler will attempt to schedule the lease without having to
preempt other leases; if preemption is unavoidable, the necessary suspension
operations are scheduled if they can be performed on time.
For both types of leases, Haizea supports pluggable policies, allowing system
administrators to write their own scheduling policies without having to modify
Haizea’s source code. Currently, three policies are pluggable in Haizea:
determining whether a lease is accepted or not, the selection of physical nodes,
and determining whether a lease can preempt another lease.
Our main results so far [25, 26] have shown that, when using workloads
that combine best-effort and advance reservation lease requests, a VM-based
approach with suspend/resume/migrate can overcome the utilization pro-
blems typically associated with the use of advance reservations. Even in the
presence of the runtime overhead resulting from using VMs, a VM-based
approach results in consistently better total execution time than a sched-
uler that does not support task preemption, along with only slightly worse
performance than a scheduler that does support task preemption. Measuring
the wait time and slowdown of best-effort leases shows that, although the
average values of these metrics increase when using VMs, this effect is due to
short leases not being preferentially selected by Haizea’s backﬁlling algo-
rithm, instead of allowing best-effort leases to run as long as possible before
a preempting AR lease (and being suspended right before the start of the
AR). In effect, a VM-based approach does not favor leases of a particular
length over others, unlike systems that rely more heavily on backﬁlling.
Our results have also shown that, although supporting the deployment of
multiple software environments, in the form of multiple VM images, requires
the transfer of potentially large disk image ﬁles, this deployment overhead can
be minimized through the use of image transfer scheduling and caching
strategies.
6.3
SCHEDULING TECHNIQUES FOR ADVANCE RESERVATION OF CAPACITY
171


6.3.5
Further Reading on Lease-Based Resource Management
There are several scholarly publications [2528] available for download at the
Haizea Web site (http://haizea.cs.uchicago.edu/) describing Haizea’s design
and algorithms in greater detail and showing performance results obtained
when using Haizea’s lease-based model.
6.4
CAPACITY MANAGEMENT TO MEET SLA COMMITMENTS
As was discussed in the previous section, when temporal behavior of services
with respect to resource demands is highly predictable (e.g., thanks to well-
known business cycle of a service, or predictable job lengths in computational
service), capacity can be efﬁciently scheduled using reservations. In this section
we focus on less predictable elastic workloads. For these workloads, exact
scheduling of capacity may not be possible. Rather than that, capacity planning
and optimizations are required.
IaaS providers perform two complementary management tasks: (1) capacity
planning to make sure that SLA obligations are met as contracted with the
service providers and (2) continuous optimization of resource utilization given
speciﬁc workload to make the most efﬁcient use of the existing capacity. It is
worthy to emphasize the rationale behind these two management processes.
The ﬁrst task pertains to the long-term capacity management aimed at cost-
efﬁcient provisioning in accordance with contracted SLAs. To protect SLAs
with end users, elastic services scale up and down dynamically. This requires an
IaaS provider to guarantee elasticity for the service within some contracted
capacity ranges. Thus, the IaaS provider should plan capacity of the cloud in
such a way that when services change resource demands in response to
environment conditions, the resources will be indeed provided with the
contracted probability. At the same time, the IaaS cloud provider strives to
minimally over-provision capacity, thus minimizing the operational costs. We
observe that these goals can be harmonized thanks to statistical multiplexing of
elastic capacity demands. The key questions will be (a) in what form to provide
capacity guarantees (i.e., infrastructure SLAs) and (b) how to control the risks
inherent to over-subscribing. We treat these problems in Sections 6.4.1 and
6.4.2, respectively.
The second task pertains to short- and medium-term optimization of
resource allocation under the current workload. This optimization may be
guided by different management policies that support high-level business goals
of an IaaS provider. We discuss policy-driven continuous resource optimization
in Section 6.4.3.
From an architectural viewpoint, we argue in favor of a resource manage-
ment framework that separates between these two activities and allows
combination of solutions to each process, which are best adapted to the needs
of a speciﬁc IaaS provider.
172
ON THE MANAGEMENT OF VIRTUAL MACHINES FOR CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURES


6.4.1
Infrastructure SLAs
IaaS can be regarded as a giant virtual hardware store, where computational
resources such as virtual machines (VM), virtual application networks (VAN)
and virtual disks (VD) can be ordered on demand in the matter of minutes or
even seconds. Virtualization technology is sufﬁciently versatile to provide
virtual resources on a almost continuous granularity scale. Chandra et al.
[29] quantitatively study advantages of ﬁne-grain resource allocation in a
shared hosting platform. As this research suggests, ﬁne-grain temporal and
spatial resource allocation may lead to substantial improvements in capacity
utilization.
These advantages come at a cost of increased management, accounting, and
billing overhead. For this reason, in practice, resources are typically provided
on a more coarse discrete scale. For example, Amazon EC2 [1] offers small,
large, and extra large general-purpose VM instances and high-CPU medium
and extra large instances. It is possible that more instance types (e.g., I/O high,
memory high, storage high, etc.) will be added in the future should a demand
for them arise. Other IaaS providers—for example, GoGrid [3] and FlexiScale
[4]—follow similar strategy.
With some caution it may be predicted that this approach, as being
considerably more simple management-wise, will remain prevalent in short to
medium term in the IaaS cloud offerings.
Thus, to deploy a service on a cloud, service provider orders suitable virtual
hardware and installs its application software on it. From the IaaS provider, a
given service conﬁguration is a virtual resource array of black box resources,
which correspond to the number of instances of resource type. For example, a
typical three-tier application may contain 10 general-purpose small instances
to run Web front-ends, three large instances to run an application server
cluster with load balancing and redundancy, and two large instances to run a
replicated database.
In an IaaS model it is expected from the service provider that it sizes capacity
demands for its service. If resource demands are provided correctly and are
indeed satisﬁed upon request, then desired user experience of the service will be
guaranteed. A risk mitigation mechanism to protect user experience in the IaaS
model is offered by infrastructure SLAs (i.e., the SLAs formalizing capacity
availability) signed between service provider and IaaS provider.
The is no universal approach to infrastructure SLAs. As the IaaS ﬁeld
matures and more experience is being gained, some methodologies may become
more popular than others. Also some methods may be more suitable for speciﬁc
workloads than other. There are three main approaches as follows.
 No SLAs. This approach is based on two premises: (a) Cloud always has
spare capacity to provide on demand, and (b) services are not QoS-
sensitive and can withstand moderate performance degradation. This
methodology is best suited for the best effort workloads.
6.4
CAPACITY MANAGEMENT TO MEET SLA COMMITMENTS
173


 Probabilistic SLAs. These SLAs allow us to trade capacity availability for
cost of consumption. Probabilistic SLAs specify clauses that determine
availability percentile for contracted resources computed over the SLA
evaluation period. The lower the availability percentile, the cheaper the
cost of resource consumption. This is justiﬁed by the fact that an IaaS
provider has less stringent commitments and can over-subscribe capacity
to maximize yield without exposing itself to excessive risk. This type of
SLA is suitable for small and medium businesses and for many enterprise
grade applications.
 Deterministic SLAs. These are, in fact, probabilistic SLAs where resource
availability percentile is 100%. These SLAs are most stringent and
difﬁcult to guarantee. From the provider’s point of view, they do not
admit capacity multiplexing. Therefore this is the most costly option for
service providers, which may be applied for critical services.
We envision coexistence of all three methodologies above, where each SLA
type is most applicable to speciﬁc workload type. We will focus on probabilistic
SLAs, however, because they represent the more interesting and ﬂexible option
and lay the foundation for the rest of discussion on statistical multiplexing of
capacity in Section 6.4.2. But before we can proceed, we need to deﬁne one
more concept, elasticity rules.
Elasticity rules are scaling and de-scaling policies that guide transition of the
service from one conﬁguration to another to match changes in the environ-
ment. The main motivation for deﬁning these policies stems from the pay-as-
you-go billing model of IaaS clouds. The service owner is interested in paying
only for what is really required to satisfy workload demands minimizing the
over-provisioning overhead.
There are three types of elasticity rules:
 Time-driven: These rules change the virtual resources array in response to
a timer event. These rules are useful for predictable workloads—for
example, for services with well-known business cycles.
 OS Level Metrics-Driven: These rules react on predicates deﬁned in terms
of the OS parameters observable in the black box mode (see Amazon
Auto-scaling Service). These auto-scaling policies are useful for transpar-
ently scaling and de-scaling services. The problem is, however, that in
many cases this mechanism is not precise enough.
 Application Metrics-Driven. This is a unique RESERVOIR offering that
allows an application to supply application-speciﬁc policies that will be
transparently executed by IaaS middleware in reacting on the monitoring
information supplied by the service-speciﬁc monitoring probes running
inside VMs.
For a single service, elasticity rules of all three types can be deﬁned, resulting
in a complex dynamic behavior of a service during runtime. To protect
174
ON THE MANAGEMENT OF VIRTUAL MACHINES FOR CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURES


elasticity rules of a service while increasing the multiplexing gain, RESER-
VOIR proposes using probabilistic infrastructure availability SLAs.
Assuming that a business day is divided into a number of usage windows, the
generic template for probabilistic infrastructure SLAs is as follows.
For each Wi, and each resource type rj from the virtual resource array,
capacity range C 5 (r j
min, rj
max) is available for the service with probability pi.
Probabilistically guaranteeing capacity ranges allows service providers to
deﬁne its needs ﬂexibly. For example, for business critical usage window,
availability percentile may be higher than for the regular or off-peak hours.
Similarly, capacity ranges may vary in size. From the provider’s point of view,
deﬁning capacity requirements this way allows yield maximization through
over-subscribing. This creates a winwin situation for both service provider
and IaaS provider.
6.4.2
Policy-Driven Probabilistic Admission Control
Beneﬁts of statistical multiplexing are well known. This is an extensively
studied ﬁeld, especially in computer networking [3032]. In the context of
CPU and bandwidth allocation in shared hosting platforms, the problem was
recently studied by Urgaonkar et al. [33]. In this work the resources were
treated as contiguous, allowing inﬁnitesimal capacity allocation. We general-
ize this approach by means of treating each (number of instances of resource i
in the virtual resources array) as a random variable. The virtual resources
array is, therefore, a vector of random variables. Since we assume that
each capacity range for each resource type is ﬁnite, we may compute both
the average resource consumption rate and variance in resource consump-
tion for each service in terms of the capacity units corresponding to each
resource type.
Inspired by the approach of Guerin et al. [30], we propose a simple
management lever termed acceptable risk level (ARL) to control over-subscrib-
ing of capacity. We deﬁne ARL as the probability of having insufﬁcient
capacity to satisfy some capacity allocation requests on demand. The ARL
value can be derived from a business policy of the IaaS provider—that is, more
aggressive versus more conservative over-subscription.
In general, the optimal ARL value can be obtained by calculating the
residual beneﬁt resulting from speciﬁc SLA violations. A more conservative,
suboptimal ARL value is simply the complement of the most stringent capacity
range availability percentile across the SLA portfolio.
An infrastructure SLA commitment for the new application service should
be made if and only if the potential effect does not cause the residual beneﬁt to
fall below some predeﬁned level, being controlled by the site’s business policy.
This decision process is referred to as BSM-aligned admission control.3
3We will refer to it simply as admission control wherever no ambiguity arises.
6.4
CAPACITY MANAGEMENT TO MEET SLA COMMITMENTS
175


Once a service application passes admission control successfully, optimal
placement should be found for the virtual resources comprising the service. We
treat this issue in Section 6.4.3.
The admission control algorithm calculates equivalent capacity required to
satisfy the resource demands of the service applications for the given ARL. The
equivalent capacity is then matched against the actual available capacity to
verify whether it is safe to admit a new service.
In a federated environment (like that provided by RESERVOIR) there is
potentially an inﬁnite pool of resources. However, these resources should ﬁt
placement constraints that are posed by the service applications and should be
reserved using inter-cloud framework agreements. Thus, the BSM-aligned
admission control helps the capacity planning process to dimension capacity
requests from the partner clouds and fulﬁll physical capacity requests at the
local cloud.
The capacity demands of the deployed application services are being
continuously monitored. For each application service, the mean capacity
demand (in capacity units) and the standard deviation of the capacity demand
are being calculated.
When a new service with unknown history arrives in the system, its mean
capacity demand and standard deviation are conservatively estimated from the
service elasticity rules and historic data known for other services. Then, an
equivalent capacity is approximated using Eq. (6.1). The equivalent capacity
is the physical capacity needed to host the new service and all previously
deployed services without increasing the probability of congestion (acceptable
risk level), ε.
Equivalent capacity is expressed in the form of resource array, where each
element represents the number of instances of a resource of a speciﬁc type.4 To
verify that physical capacity is sufﬁcient to support the needed equivalent
capacity, one may use either the efﬁcient and scalable exact solution (via branch
and bound algorithms) to the multiple knapsack problem [48] or the efﬁcient
bin-packing approximation algorithm such as First-Fit-Descending, which
guarantees approximation ratio within 22% of the optimal algorithm. Using
multiple knapsacks is more appropriate when capacity augmentation is not an
option. Assuming that value of the resources is proportional to their size,
solving the multiple knapsack problem provides a good estimation of value
resulting from packing the virtual resources on the given capacity. If capacity
can be augmented—for example, more physical capacity can be obtained from
a partner cloud provider or procured locally—then solving the bin packing
problem is more appropriate since all items (i.e., resources comprising the
service) are always packed.
4When calculating equivalent capacity, we do not know which service will use speciﬁc resource
instances, but we know that it is sufﬁcient, say, to be able to allocate up to 100 small VM instances and
50 large instances to guarantee all resource requests resulting from the elasticity rules application, so
that congestion in resource allocation will not happen with probability larger than ε.
176
ON THE MANAGEMENT OF VIRTUAL MACHINES FOR CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURES


Note that this is different from computing the actual placement of services
since at the admission control stage we have “abstract” equivalent capacity.
Matching equivalent capacity against physical capacity, as above, guarantees
that feasible placement for actual services can be found with probability 1 2 ε.
If the local and remote physical capacity that can be used by this site in a
guaranteed manner is sufﬁcient to support the equivalent capacity calculated,
the new service is accepted. Otherwise, a number of possibilities exist, depend-
ing on the management policy:
 The service is rejected.
 The total capacity of the site is increased locally and/or remotely (through
federation) by the amount needed to satisfy the equivalent capacity
constraint and the service is admitted.
 The acceptable risk level is increased, and the service is accepted.
Beq ¼ m þ α  σ
ð6:1Þ
m ¼
X
n
i
mi
ð6:2Þ
σ ¼
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
X
n
i
σ2
s
ð6:3Þ
α ¼
ﬃﬃ
2
p
 erfc1ð2εÞ 
ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ
2ln ε  ln2π  lnð2ln ε  ln2πÞ
p
ð6:4Þ
Our approach initially overestimates the average capacity demand for the
new service. With the passage of time, however, as capacity usage statistics are
being collected for the newly admitted application service, the mean and
standard deviation for the capacity demands (per resource type) are adjusted
for this service. This allows us to reduce the conservativeness when the next
service arrives.
Service providers may impose various placement restrictions on VMs
comprising the service. For example, it may be required that VMs do not
share the same physical host (anti-afﬁnity). As another example, consider
heterogeneous physical infrastructure and placement constraints arising from
technological incompatibilities.
From the admission control algorithm’s vantage point, the problem is that
during admission control it may not know which deployment restrictions
6.4
CAPACITY MANAGEMENT TO MEET SLA COMMITMENTS
177


should be taken into account since which restrictions will be of relevance
depends on the dynamic behavior of the services.
Thus, our proposed solution is best suited for services whose elements admit
full sharing of the infrastructure. Generalizing this approach to handle various
types of deployment restrictions is in the focus of our current research efforts.
In general, to guarantee that a feasible placement for virtual resources will be
found with controllable probability in the presence of placement restrictions,
resource augmentation is required. The resource augmentation may be quite
signiﬁcant (see references 34 and 35). It is, therefore, prudent on the side of the
IaaS provider to segregate workloads that admit full sharing of the infrastru-
cture from those who do not and offer service provider-controlled deployment
restrictions as a premium service to recover capacity augmentation costs.
6.4.3
Policy-Driven Placement Optimization
The purpose of statistical admission control is to guarantee that there is enough
capacity to ﬁnd a feasible placement with given probability. Policy-driven
placement optimization complements capacity planning and management by
improving a given mapping of physical to virtual resources (e.g., VMs).
In the presence of deployment restrictions, efﬁcient capacity planning with
guaranteed minimal over-provisioning is still an open research problem.
Partially the difﬁculties lie in hardness of solving multiple knapsacks or its
more general version, the generalized assignment problem. Both problems are
NP-hard in the strong sense (see discussion in Section 6.4.5). In the RESER-
VOIR model, where resource augmentation is possible through cloud partner-
ship, solutions that may require doubling of existing local capacity in the worst
case [34] are applicable. An interesting line of research is to approximate
capacity augmentation introduced by speciﬁc constraints, such as binitem
and itemitem. Based on required augmentation, an IaaS provider may either
accept or reject the service.
As shown in reference 36, in the presence of placement constraints of type
binitem,
Bi-criteria
Multiple
Knapsack
with
Assignment
Restrictions
(BMKAR) that maximizes the total proﬁt of placed items (subject to a lower
bound) and minimizes the total number of containers (i.e., minimizes utilized
capacity) does not admit a polynomial algorithm that satisﬁes the lower bound
exactly unless P 5 NP. Two approximation algorithms with performance ratios
(running in pseudo-polynomial time) and (running in polynomial time) were
presented. These results are best known today for BMKAR, and the bounds
are tight.
In our current prototypical placement solution, we formulated the problem
as an Integer Linear Programming problem and used branch-and-bound solver
(COIN-CBC [37]) to solve the problem exactly. This serves us as a performance
baseline for future research. As was shown by Pisinger [38], in the absence of
constraints, very large problem instances can be solved exactly in a very
efﬁcient manner using a branch-and-bound algorithm. Obviously, as the scale
178
ON THE MANAGEMENT OF VIRTUAL MACHINES FOR CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURES


of the problem (in terms of constraints) increases, ILP becomes infeasible. This
leads us to focus on developing novel heuristic algorithms extending the state of
art, which is discussed in Section 6.4.5.
A number of important aspects should be taken into account in efﬁcient
placement optimization.
Penalization for Nonplacement. In BMKAR, as in all classical knapsack
problems, no-placement of an item results in 0 proﬁt for that item. In the
VM placement with SLA protection problem, nonplacement of an item or
a group of items may result in SLA violation and, thus, payment of
penalty. The management policy to minimize nonplacements is factored
into constraints and an objective function.
Selection Constraints. Selection constraints imply that only when a group of
VMs (items) collectively forming a service is placed, this meta-item yields
proﬁt. Partial placement may even lead to a penalty, since the SLA of a
service may be violated. Thus, partial placement should be prevented. In
our formulation, this is factored into constraints.
Repeated Solution. Since the placement problem is solved continuously, it is
important to minimize the cost of replacement. In particular, we need to
minimize the cost of reassignments of VMs to hosts, because this entails
VM migrations. We factor the penalty member on migration in our
objective function.
Considering ICT-Level Management Policies. There are three policies
that we currently consider: power conservation (by minimizing the number
of physical hosts used for placement), load balancing (by spreading
load across available physical machines), and migration minimization
(by introducing a penalty factor for machines migration). We discuss
policies below. In general, RESERVOIR provides an open-ended engine
that allows to incorporate different policies. Depending on the policy
chosen, the optimization problem is cast into a speciﬁc form. Currently,
we support two placement policies: “load balancing” and “power con-
servation,” with number of migrations minimized in both cases. The ﬁrst
policy is attained through solving GAP with conﬂicts, and the second one
is implemented via bin packing with conﬂicts.
Inspired by results by Santos et al. [39], who cast infrastructure-level
management policies as soft constraints, we factor the load balancing policy
into our model using the soft constraints approach.
Whereas the hard constraints take the form of
f ð~xÞ # b
ð6:5Þ
where ~x is the vector of decision variables, with the soft constraints approach, a
constraint violation variable v is introduced into the hard constraint as shown in
Eq. (6.6) and a penalty term P  v is introduced into the objective function to
6.4
CAPACITY MANAGEMENT TO MEET SLA COMMITMENTS
179


prevent trivial solutions, because soft constraints are always possible to satisfy.
If the penalty is a sufﬁciently large number, the search for an optimal solution
will try to minimize it.
f ð~xÞ # b þ υ
ð6:6Þ
We exploit the idea that reducing the available capacity at each physical host
will force the search for an optimal solution to spread the VEEs over a larger
number of knapsacks, thus causing the load to be spread more evenly across the
site.
To address power conservation objective as a management policy, we
formulate our problem as bin-packing with conﬂicts.
Since the optimization policy for VEE placement is being continuously
solved, it is critical to minimize VEE migrations in order to maintain cost-
effectiveness. To model this, we deﬁne a migration penalty term MP as shown
in Eq. (6.7).
MP ¼
X
m
i¼1
X
n
j¼1
migrðjÞ  absðxt1
i; j  xt
i; jÞ
ð6:7Þ
Since abs(  ), which is a nonlinear, is part of MP, we cannot incorporate MP
into the objective function as is. To circumvent this problem, we linearize MP
by introducing additional variables, which is a widely used linearization
technique.
Management Policies and Management Goals. Policy-based management
is an overused term. Therefore, it is, beneﬁcial to deﬁne and differentiate our
approach to policy-driven admission control and placement optimization in the
more precise terms.
Policy-driven management is a management approach based on “if(con-
dition)then(action)” rules deﬁned to deal with the situations that are likely to
arise [40]. These policies serve as a basic building blocks for autonomic
computing.
The overall optimality criteria of placement, however, are controlled by the
management policies, which are deﬁned at a higher level of abstraction than “if
(condition)then(action)” rules. To avoid ambiguity, we term these policies
management goals. Management goals, such as “conserve power,” “prefer local
resources over remote resources,” “balance workload,” “minimize VM migra-
tions,” “minimize SLA noncompliance,” and so forth, have complex logical
structures. They cannot be trivially expressed by “if(condition)then(action)”
rules even though it is possible to create the elementary rules that will strive to
satisfy global management preferences in a reactive or proactive manner.
Regarding the management activity involved in VM placement opti-
mization, a two-phase approach can be used. In the ﬁrst phase, a feasible
180
ON THE MANAGEMENT OF VIRTUAL MACHINES FOR CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURES


placement—that is, a placement that satisﬁes the hard constraints imposed by
the service manifest—can be obtained without concerns for optimality and,
thus, with low effort. In the second phase, either a timer-based or a threshold-
based management policy can invoke a site-wide optimization procedure that
aligns capacity allocation with the management goals (e.g., with the goal of
using minimal capacity, can be triggered).
Management policies and management goals may be deﬁned at different
levels of the management architecture—that is, at the different levels of
abstraction. At the topmost level, there are business management goals and
policies. We brieﬂy discuss them in the next subsection. In the intermediate level
there are service-induced goals and policies. Finally, at the infrastructure
management level there are ICT management preferences and policies that
are our primary focus in this activity. We discuss them in Section 6.4.4.
Business-Level Goals and Policies. Since business goals are deﬁned at
such a high level of abstraction, a semantic gap exists between them and the
ICT level management goals and policies. Bridging this gap is notoriously
difﬁcult. In this work we aim at narrowing this gap and aligning between the
high-level business management goals and ICT-level management policies by
introducing the notion of acceptable risk level (ARL) of capacity allocation
congestion.
Intuitively, we are interested in minimizing the costs of capacity over-
provisioning while controlling the risk associated with capacity over-booking.
From minimizing the cost of capacity over-provisioning, we are interested in
maximizing yield of the existing capacity. However, at some point, the conﬂicts
(congestions) in capacity allocation may cause excessive SLA penalties that
would offset the advantages of yield maximization.
Accounting for beneﬁts from complying with SLAs and for costs of
compliance and noncompliance due to congestions, we can compute residual
beneﬁt for the site. The target value of residual beneﬁt can be controlled by a
high-level business policy. To satisfy this business policy, we need to calculate
an appropriate congestion probability, ARL. ARL, in turn, would help us
calculate equivalent capacity for the site to take advantage of statistical
multiplexing in a safe manner.
To allow calculation of residual beneﬁt, capacity allocation behavior under
congestion should deterministic. In particular, a policy under congestion may
be a MaxMin Fair Share allocation [41] or higher-priority-ﬁrst (HPF)
capacity allocation [39], where services with lower SLA classes are satisﬁed
only after all services with higher SLA classes are satisﬁed.
For the sake of discussion, let us assume that the HPF capacity allocation
policy is used.5 We use historical data of the capacity demand (in capacity
5Whether a certain speciﬁc policy is being used is of minor importance. It is important, however,
that the policy would be deterministic.
6.4
CAPACITY MANAGEMENT TO MEET SLA COMMITMENTS
181


units corresponding to different resource types as explained in Section 6.4.2)
per service—speciﬁcally, the α-percentile of historic capacity demand per
application (where α equals the percentile of compliance required in the ser-
vice SLA). This is used to compute the expected capacity allocation per service
under capacity allocation congestion. Thus, we obtain the set of application
services, whose SLAs may be violated.6 Using penalty values deﬁned for each
affected SLA, we obtain the residual beneﬁt that would remain after penalties
are enforced. Using the management policy that put a lower bound on the
expected residual beneﬁt, we compute acceptable risk value, ε, that satisﬁes this
bound.
6.4.4
Infrastructure-Level Management Goals and Policies
In general, infrastructure-level management policies are derived from the
business-level management goals. For example, consider our sample business
level management goal to “reduce energy expenses by 30% in the next quarter.”
This broadly deﬁned goal may imply, among other means for achieving it, that
we systematically improve consolidation of VMs on physical hosts by putting
excessive capacity into a low-power consumption mode. Thus, a site-wide ICT
power conservation-level management policy may be formulated as: “minimize
number of physical machines while protecting capacity availability SLAs of the
application services.”
As another example, consider the business-level management goal: “Improve
customer satisfaction by achieving more aggressive performance SLOs.” One
possible policy toward satisfying this business-level goal may be formulated as:
“Balance load within the site in order to achieve speciﬁc average load per
physical host.” Another infrastructure-level management policy to imp-
rove performance is: “Minimize the number of VM migrations.” The rationale
for this policy is that performance degradation necessarily occurs during VM
migration.
6.4.5
State of the Art
Our approach to capacity management described in Section 6.4.2 is based on
the premise that service providers perform sizing of their services. A detailed
discussion of the sizing methodologies is out of our scope, and we will only
brieﬂy mention results in this area. Capacity planning for Web services was
studied by Menasc´e and Almeida [42]. Doyle et al. [43] considered the problem
of how to map requirements of a known media service workload into the
corresponding system resource requirements and to accurately size the required
system. Based on the past workload history, the capacity planner ﬁnds the 95th
6This is a conservative estimate.
182
ON THE MANAGEMENT OF VIRTUAL MACHINES FOR CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURES


percentile of the service demand (for various resources and on different usage
windows) and asks for the corresponding conﬁguration. Urgaonkar et al. [44]
studied model-based sizing of three-tier commercial services. Recently, Chen et
al. [45] sudied the similar problem and provided novel performance models for
multi-tier services.
Doyle et al. [43] presented new models for automating resource provision-
ing for resources that may interact in complex ways. The premise of the
model-based resource provisioning is that internal models capturing service
workload and behavior can enable prediction of effects on service perfor-
mance of the changes to the service workload and resource allotments. For
example, the model can answer questions like: “How much memory is needed
to reduce this service’s storage access rate by 20%?” The paper introduces
simple performance models for Web services and proposes a model-based
resource allocator that utilizes them and allocates appropriate resource slices
to achieve needed performance versus capacity utilization. A slice may be
mapped to a virtual machine or another resource container providing
performance isolation.
In cases when exact model-driven service sizing is not available, learning
desirable resource allocation from dynamic service behavior may be possible
using black box monitoring of the service network activity as was recently
shown by Ben-Yehuda et al. [46] for multi-tier services.
Beneﬁts of capacity multiplexing (under the assumption of known resource
demands) in shared hosting platforms were quantitatively studied by Chandra
et al. [29].
An approach to capacity over-subscribing that is conceptually similar to
ours was recently studied by Urgaonkar et al. [33]. In this work, provisioning
CPU and network resources with probabilitistic guarantees on a shared hosting
platform were considered. The main difference between our methodology
and that of Urgaonkar et al. is that we allocate capacity in integral discrete
quanta that encapsulate CPU, memory, network bandwidth, and storage rather
than allowing independent inﬁnitesimally small resources allocation along each
of this capacity dimensions.
An advance of virtualization technologies and increased awareness about
management and power costs of running under-utilized servers have spurred
interest in consolidating existing applications on a fewer number of servers
in the data center. In most practical settings today a static approach to
consolidation, where consolidation is performed as a point-in-time optimiza-
tion activity, is used [47, 48]. With the static approach, the cost of VM
migration are usually not accounted for and relatively time-consuming com-
putations are tolerated. Gupta et al. [48] demonstrated that static consolidation
problem can be modeled as a variant of the bin packing problem where items to
be packed are the servers being consolidated and bins are the target servers.
The sizes of the servers/items being packed are resource utilizations that are
obtained from the performance trace data. The authors present a two-stage
heuristic algorithm for handling the “binitem” assignment constraints that
6.4
CAPACITY MANAGEMENT TO MEET SLA COMMITMENTS
183


inherently restrict any server consolidation problem. The model is able to solve
extremely large instances of the problem in a reasonable amount of time.
Autonomic and dynamic optimization of virtual machines placement in a
data center received considerable attention (mainly in the research community)
recently [4959].
Bobroff et al. [54] introduce empiric dynamic server migration and con-
solidation algorithm based on predicting capacity demand of virtual servers
using time series analysis.
Mehta and Neogi [49] presented a virtualized servers consolidation planning
tool, Recon, that analyzes historical data collected from an existing environ-
ment and computes the potential beneﬁts of server consolidation especially in
the dynamic setting.
Gmach et al. [50] considered virtualized servers consolidation of multiple
servers and their workloads subject to speciﬁc quality of service requirements
that need to be supported.
Wood et al. [52] presented Sandpiper, a system that automates the task of
monitoring and detecting hotspots, determining a new mapping of physical to
virtual resources, and initiating the necessary migrations to protect performance.
Singh et al. [53] presented a promising approach to the design of an agile
data center with integrated server and storage virtualization technologies.
Verma et al. [51] studied the design, implementation, and evaluation of a
power-aware application placement controller in the context of an environment
with heterogeneous virtualized server clusters.
Tang et al. [58] presented a performance model-driven approach to applica-
tion placement that can be extended to VM placement.
Wang et al. [55] deﬁned a nonlinear constrained optimization model for
dynamic resource provisioning and presented a novel analytic solution.
Choi et al. [60] proposed machine learning framework that autonomously
ﬁnds and adjusts utilization thresholds at runtime for different computing
requirements.
Kelly [59] studied the problem of allocating discrete resources according to
utility functions reported by potential recipients with application to resource
allocation in a Utility Data Center (UDC).
Knapsack-related optimization has been relentlessly studied over the last
30 years. The scientiﬁc literature on the subject is, therefore, abundant. For
excellent treatment of the knapsack problems, we recommend references 61 and
62. The Simple Multiple Knapsack Problem (MKP) is NP-hard in the strong
sense. Its generalization, called Generalized Assignment Problem (GAP), is
APX-hard [63]. GAP (and therefore MKP) admits two approximations using a
greedy algorithm [64]. A Fully Polynomial Time Approximation Scheme
(FPTAS) for this problem is unlikely unless P 5 NP [65]. For some time it
was not known whether simple MKP admits the Polynomial Time Approx-
imation Scheme (PTAS). Chekuri and Khanna [63] presented a PTAS for MKP
in 2000. Shachnai and Tamir showed that the Class-Constrained Multiple
Knapsack also admits PTAS.
184
ON THE MANAGEMENT OF VIRTUAL MACHINES FOR CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURES


Running time of PTASs dramatically increases as ε decreases.7 Therefore
heuristic algorithms optimized for speciﬁc private cases and scalable exeat
solutions are important.
Pisinger [38] presented a scalable exact branch-and-bound algorithm for
solving multiple knapsack problems with hundreds of thousands of items and
high ratios of items to bins. This algorithm improves the branch-and-bound
algorithm by Martello and Toth [61].
Dawande et al. [34] studied single-criterion and bi-criteria multiple knapsack
problems with assignment restrictions. For the bi-criteria problem of minimiz-
ing utilized capacity subject to a minimum requirement on assigned weight,
they give a (1/3, 2)-approximation algorithm, where the ﬁrst value refers to
proﬁt and the second one refers to capacity augmentation.
Gupta et al. [66] presented a two-stage consolidation heuristic for servers
consolidation that handles itembin and itemitem conﬂicts. No bounds on
this heuristic were shown, however.
Epstein and Levin [35] studied the bin packing problem with itemitem con-
ﬂicts. For bipartite graphs they present a 2.5 approximation algorithm for perfect
graphs (of conﬂicts) and a 1.75 approximation algorithm for bipartite graphs.
Additional annotated bibliography and surveys on the knapsack-related
problems can be found in references 67 and 68. For survey of the recent results
in multi-criteria combinatorial optimization, see reference 69.
An important question for studying scalability of the optimization algo-
rithms is how to produce meaningful benchmarks for the tests. Pisinger [70]
studied relative hardness characterization of the knapsack problems. This study
may serve as a basis for generating synthetic benchmarks to be used in
validating knapsack related solutions.
Business-driven resource provisioning was studied by Marques et al. in [71].
This work proposes a business-oriented approach to designing IT infrastruc-
ture in an e-commerce context subject to load surges.
Santos et al. [39] demonstrated that management policies can be effectively
and elegantly cast as soft constraints into optimization problem.
From analyzing the state of the art in provisioning and placement optimiza-
tion, we observe that the mainstream approach is detection and remediation. In
a nutshell, the SLA compliance of the services is being monitored and when
noncompliance or a dangerous trend that may lead to noncompliance is
detected, corrective actions (e.g., VEE migrations) are attempted.
6.5
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Virtualization is one of the cornerstones of Infrastructure-as-a-Service cloud
computing and, although virtual machines provide numerous beneﬁts,
7Here ε stands for the approximation parameter and should not be confused with the acceptable
risk level of Section 6.4.2, which was also denoted ε.
6.5
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
185


managing them efﬁciently in a cloud also poses a number of challenges. This
chapter has described some of these challenges, along with the ongoing work
within the RESERVOIR project to address them. In particular, we have
focused on the problems of distributed management of virtual infrastructures,
advance reservation of capacity in virtual infrastructures, and meeting SLA
commitments.
Managing virtual machines distributed across a pool of physical resources,
or virtual infrastructure management, is not a new problem. VM-based data
center management tools have been available long before the emergence of
cloud computing. However, these tools specialized in long-running VMs and
exhibited monolithic architectures that were hard to extend, or were limited by
design to use one particular hypervisor. Cloud infrastructures need to support
pay-as-you-go and on-demand models where VMs have to be provisioned
immediately and fully conﬁgured for the user, which requires coordinating
storage, network, and virtualization technologies. To this end, we have
developed OpenNebula, a virtual infrastructure manager designed with the
requirements of cloud infrastructures in mind. OpenNebula is an actively
developed open source project, and future work will focus on managing groups
of VMs arranged in a service-like structure (e.g., a compute cluster), disk image
provision strategies to reduce image cloning times, and improving support for
external providers to enable a hybrid cloud model.
We have also developed Haizea, a resource lease manager that can act as a
scheduling back-end for OpenNebula, supporting other provisioning models
other than the prevalent immediate provisioning models in existing cloud
providers. In particular, Haizea adds support for best-effort provisioning and
advance reservations, both of which become necessary when managing a ﬁnite
number of resources. Future work will focus on researching policies for lease
admission and lease preemption, particularly those based on economic models,
and will also focus on researching adaptive scheduling strategies for advance
reservations.
We developed an algorithmic approach to resource over-subscription with
probabilistically guaranteed risk of violating SLAs. Our future work in this
area will focus on (1) validation of this approach with synthetic and real data
through simulating a large-scale IaaS cloud environment, (2) complementing
admission control and capacity planning with heuristics for workload throt-
tling, particularly those that take advantage of opportunistic placement in a
federated environment, to handle the cases when stochastic properties of the
underlying system change abruptly and dramatically, and (3) policies to control
cost-effectiveness of resource allocation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Our work is supported by the European Union through the research grant
RESERVOIR Grant Number 215605.
186
ON THE MANAGEMENT OF VIRTUAL MACHINES FOR CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURES


REFERENCES
1.
Inc. Amazon. Amazon elastic compute cloud (Amazon ec2). http://aws.amazon.
com/ec2/.
2.
ElasticHosts Ltd. Elastichosts. http://www.elastichosts.com/.
3.
ServePath LLC. Gogrid. http://www.gogrid.com/.
4.
xcalibre communications ltd., Flexiscale. http://www.ﬂexiscale.com/.
5.
B. Rochwerger, J. Caceres, R. S. Montero, D. Breitgand, E. Elmroth, A. Galis, E.
Levy, I. M. Llorente, K. Nagin, and Y. Wolfsthal, The RESERVOIR model and
architecture for open federated cloud computing, IBM Systems Journal, 53
(4):4:14:11, 2009.
6.
Platform Computing Corporation. Platform http://www.platform.com/Products/
platform-isf.
7.
VMware Inc., Vmware DRS, http://www.vmware.com/products/vi/vc/drs.html.
8.
Enomaly, Inc. Elastic computing platform. http://www.enomaly.com/.
9.
Red Hat. ovirt. http://ovirt.org/.
10.
I. Foster, C. Kesselman, C. Lee, R. Lindell, K. Nahrstedt, and A. Roy, A distributed
resource management architecture that supports advance reservations and co-
allocation, in Proceedings of the International Workshop on Quality of Service, 1999.
11.
W. Smith, I. Foster, and V. Taylor, Scheduling with advanced reservations, in
Proceedings of the 14th International Symposium on Parallel and Distributed
Processing, IEEE Computer Society, 2000, p. 127.
12.
Q. Snell, M. J. Clement, D. B. Jackson, and C. Gregory, The performance impact of
advance reservation meta-scheduling, in Proceedings of the Workshop on Job Schedul-
ing Strategies for Parallel Processing, Springer-Verlag, London, 2000, pp. 137153.
13.
M. W. Margo, K. Yoshimoto, P. Kovatch, and P. Andrews, Impact of reservations
on production job scheduling, in Proceedings of the 13th Workshop on Job
Scheduling Strategies for Parallel Processing, 116131, 2007.
14.
I. M. Llorente, R. Moreno-Vozmediano, and R. S. Montero, Cloud computing for
on-demand grid resource provisioning, in Advances in Parallel Computing, IOS
Press, volume 18, pp. 177191, 2009.
15.
T. Freeman and K. Keahey, Contextualization: Providing one-click virtual
clusters, in Proceedings of the IEEE Fourth International Conference on eScience,
301308, December 2008.
16.
R. Moreno, R. S. Montero, and I. M. Llorente, Elastic management of cluster-
based services in the cloud, in Proceedings of the First Workshop on Automated
Control for Datacenters and Clouds (ACDC 2009), 1924, June 2009.
17.
P. H. Hargrove and J. C. Duell, Berkeley Lab checkpoint/restart (blcr) for linux
clusters, Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 46:494499, 2006.
18.
D. C. Nurmi, R. Wolski, and J. Brevik, Varq: Virtual advance reservations for
queues, in Proceedings of the 17th International Symposium on High Performance
Distributed Computing, ACM, New York, 2008, pp. 7586.
19.
M. Hovestadt, O. Kao, A. Keller, and A. Streit, Scheduling in hpc resource
management systems: Queuing vs. planning, Lecture Notes in Computer Science
2862, Springer, Berlin, 2003, pp. 120.
REFERENCES
187


20.
F. Heine, M. Hovestadt, O. Kao, and A. Streit, On the impact of reservations from
the grid on planning-based resource management, in Proceedings of the 5th
International Conference on Computational Science (ICCS 2005), Volume 3516 of
Lecture Notes in Computer Science (LNCS,) Springer, Berlin, 2005, pp. 155162.
21.
T. Freeman, K. Keahey, I. T. Foster, A. Rana, B. Sotomayor, and F. Wuerthwein,
Division of labor: Tools for growing and scaling grids, in Proceedings of the
International Conference on Service Oriented Computing, 4051, 2006.
22.
K. Keahey and T. Freeman, Contextualization: Providing one-click virtual clusters,
in Proceedings of the IEEE Fourth International Conference on eScience, 2008.
23.
Ahuva W. Mu’alem and Dror G. Feitelson, Utilization, predictability, workloads,
and user runtime estimates in scheduling the IBM SP2 with backﬁlling, IEEE
Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems, 12(6):529543, 2001.
24.
D. A. Lifka, The ANL/IBM SP scheduling system, in Proceedings of the Workshop
on Job Scheduling Strategies for Parallel Processing, Springer-Verlag, London,
1995, pp. 295303.
25.
B. Sotomayor, K. Keahey, and I. Foster, Combining batch execution and leasing
using virtual machines, in Proceedings of the 17th International Symposium on High
Performance Distributed Computing, ACM, New York, 2008, pp. 8796.
26.
B. Sotomayor, R. S. Montero, I. M. Llorente, and Ian Foster, Resource leasing
and the art of suspending virtual machines, in Proceedings of the 11th IEEE
International Conference on High Performance Computing and Communications
(HPCC-09), 5968, June 2009.
27.
B. Sotomayor, A resource management model for VM-based virtual workspaces.
Master’s thesis, University of Chicago, February 2007.
28.
B. Sotomayor, K. Keahey, I. Foster, and T. Freeman, Enabling cost-effective
resource leases with virtual machines, in Hot Topics session in ACM/IEEE
International Symposium on High Performance Distributed Computing 2007
(HPDC 2007), 2007.
29.
A. Chandra, P. Goyal, and P. Shenoy, Quantifying the beneﬁts of resource
multiplexing in on-demand data centers, in Proceedings of the First ACM Work-
shop on Algorithms and Architectures for Self-Managing Systems (Self-Manage
2003), January 2003.
30.
R. Guerin, H. Ahmadi, and M. Nagshineh, Equivalent Capacity and its applica-
tion to bandwidth allocation in high speed networks, IEEE Journal on Selected
Areas in Communication, 9(7):968981, 1991.
31.
Zhi-Li Zhang, J. Kurose, J. D. Salehi, and D. Towsley, Smoothing, statistical
multiplexing, and call admission control for stored video, IEEE Selected Areas in
Communications, 15(6):11481166, 1997.
32.
E. W. Knightly and N. B. Shroff, Admission control for statistical qos: Theory and
practice. IEEE Network, 13(2):2029, 1999.
33.
B. Urgaonkar, B. Urgaonkar, P. Shenoy, P. Shenoy, and T. Roscoe, Resource
overbooking and application proﬁling in shared hosting platforms, in Proceedings
of the 5th Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI’02),
2002, pp. 239254.
34.
M. Dawande, J. Kalagnanam, P. Keskinocak, R. Ravi, and F. S. Salman,
Approximation algorithms for the Multiple Knapsack Problem with assignment
188
ON THE MANAGEMENT OF VIRTUAL MACHINES FOR CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURES


restrictions, Journal of Combinatorial Optimization, 4:171186, 2000. http://www.
research.ibm.com/pdos/doc/papers/mkar.ps.
35.
L. Epstein and A. Levin, On bin packing with conﬂicts, SIAM Journal on
Optimization, 19(3):12701298, 2008.
36.
M. Dawande and J. Kalagnanam, The Multiple Knapsack Problem with Color
Constraints, Technical Report, IBM T. J. Watson Research, 1998.
37.
J. Forrest and R. Lougee-Heimer, Cbc user guide. http://www.coinor.org/Cbc/
index.html, 2005.
38.
D. Pisinger, An exact algorithm for large multiple knapsack problems, European
Journal of Operational Research, 114:528541, 1999.
39.
C. A. Santos, A. Sahai, X. Zhu, D. Beyer, V. Machiraju, and S. Singhal, Policy-
based resource assignment in utility computing Environments, in Proceedings of
The 15th IFIP/IEEE Distributed Systems: Operations and Management, Davis, CA,
November 2004.
40.
D. Verma, Simplifying network administration using policy-based management,
IEEE Network, 16(2):2026, Jul 2002.
41.
S. Keshav, An Engineering Approach to Computing Networking. Addison-Wesley
Professional Series, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1997.
42.
Daniel A. Menasc´e and Virgilio A. F. Almeida, Capacity Planning for Web
Performance: metrics, models, and methods. Prentice-Hall, 1998.
43.
R. P. Doyle, J. S. Chase, O. M. Asad, W. Jin, and A. M. Vahdat., Model-based
resource provisioning in a Web service utility, in Proceedings of the USENIX
Symposium on Internet Technologies and Systems (USITS), p. 5, 2003.
44.
B. Urgaonkar, G. Paciﬁci, P. Shenoy, M. Spreitzer, and A. Tantawi, An analytical
model for multi-tier internet services and its applications, in Proceedings of the
2005 ACM SIGMETRICS International Conference on Measurement and Modeling
of Computer Systems, ACM, New York, 2005, pp. 291302.
45.
Y. Chen, S. Iyer, D. Milojicic, and A. Sahai, A systematic and practical ap-
proach to generating policies from service level objectives, in Proceedings of the
11th IFIP/IEEE International Symposium on Integrated Network Management,
8996, 2009.
46.
M. Ben-Yehuda, D. Breitgand, M. Factor, H. Kolodner, and V. Kravtsov, NAP: A
building block for remediating performance bottlenecks via black box network
analysis, in Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Autonomic Comput-
ing and Communications (ICAC’09), Barcelona, Spain, 179188, June 2009.
47.
T. Yuyitung and A. Hillier, Virtualization analysis for VMware, Technical Report,
CiRBA, 2007.
48.
R. Gupta, S. K. Bose, S. Sundarrajan, M. Chebiyam, and A. Chakrabarti, A
two stage heuristic algorithm for solving the server consolidation problem with
itemitem and binitem incompatibility constraints, in Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Services Computing (SCC’08), Vol. 2, Honolulu, HI,
July 2008, pp. 3946.
49.
S. Mehta and A. Neogi, Recon: A tool to recommend dynamic server consolida-
tion in multi-cluster data centers, Proceedings of the IEEE Network Operations
and Management Symposium (NOMS 2008), Salvador, Bahia, Brasil, April 2008,
pp. 363370.
REFERENCES
189


50.
D. Gmach, J. Rolia, L. Cherkasova, G. Belrose, T. Turicchi, and A. Kemper, An
integrated approach to resource pool management: Policies, efﬁciency and quality
metrics, in Proceedings of the 38th Annual IEEE/IFIP International Conference on
Dependable Systems and Networks (DSN’2008), 2008.
51.
A. Verma, P. Ahuja, and A. Neogi, pmapper: Power and migration cost aware
application placement in virtualized systems, in Proceedings of the 9th ACM/IFIP/
USENIX International Conference on Middleware, 2008, Springer-Verlag, New
York, pp. 243264.
52.
T. Wood, P. Shenoy, A. Venkataramani, and M. Yousif. Black-box and gray-box
strategies for virtual machine migration, in Proceedings of the USENIX Symposium
on Networked System Design and Implementation (NSDI’07), Cambridge, MA,
April 2007.
53.
A. Singh, M. Korupolu, and D. Mohapatra, Server-storage virtualization: Inte-
gration and load balancing in data centers, in Proceedings of the 7th International
Symposium on Software Composition (SC 2008), Budapest, Hungary, Article
No. 53, March 2008.
54.
N. Bobroff, A. Kochut, and K. Beaty, Dynamic placement of virtual machines for
managing SLA violations, in Proceedings of the 10th IFIP/IEEE International
Symposium on Integrated Network Management, IM ’07, pp. 119128, 2007. Best
Paper award, IM’07.
55.
X. Wang, Z. Du, Y. Chen, S. Li, D. Lan, G. Wang, and Y. Chen, An autonomic
provisioning framework for outsourcing data center based on virtual appliances,
Cluster Computing, 11(3):229245, 2008.
56.
C.
Hyser,
B.
McKee,
R.
Gardner,
and
J.
Watson.
Autonomic
Virtual
Machine Placement in the Data Center, Technical Report, HP Laboratories,
February 2008.
57.
L. Grit, D. Irwin, A. Yumerefendi, and J. Chase, Virtual machine hosting for
networked clusters: Building the foundations for “autonomic” orchestration, in
Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on Virtualization Technology in
Distributed Computing, Washington, DC, IEEE Computer Society, 2006, p. 7.
58.
C. Tang, M. Steinder, M. Spreitzer, and G. Paciﬁci, A scalable applica-
tion placement controller for enterprise data centers, in Proceedings of the
16th International World Wide Web Conference (WWW07), Bannf, Canada,
331340, May 2007.
59.
T. Kelly, Utility-directed allocation, in Proceedings of the First Workshop on
Algorithms and Architectures for Self-Managing Systems, 2003.
60.
H. W. Choi, H. Kwak, A. Sohn, and K. Chung. Autonomous learning for efﬁcient
resource utilization of dynamic VM migration, in Proceedings of the 22nd Annual
International Conference on Supercomputing, New York, ACM, 2008, pp. 185194.
61.
S. Martello and P. Toth, Knapsack Problems, Algorithms and Computer Imple-
mentations, John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1990.
62.
H. Kellerer, U. Pferschy, and D. Pisinger, Knapsack Problems, Springer, Berlin,
2004.
63.
C. Chekuri and S. Khanna, A PTAS for the multiple knapsack problem, in
Proceedings of the Eleventh Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algo-
rithms, 2000, pp. 213222.
190
ON THE MANAGEMENT OF VIRTUAL MACHINES FOR CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURES


64.
D. B. Shmoys and E. Tardos, An approximation algorithm for the generalized
assignment problem, Mathematical Programming, 62:461474, 1993.
65.
M. R. Garey and David S. Johnson, Computers and Intractability: A Guide to the
Theory of NP-Completeness, W. H. Freeman, New York, 1979.
66.
R. Gupta, S. K. Bose, S. Sundarrajan, M. Chebiyam, and A. Chakrabarti, A two
stage heuristic algorithm for solving the server consolidation problem with
itemitem and binitem incompatibility constraints, in Proceedings of the 2008
IEEE International Conference on Services Computing, Washington, DC, IEEE
Computer Society, 2008, pp. 3946.
67.
E. Yu-Hsien Lin, A Bibliographical Survey On Some Well-Known Non-Standard
Knapsack Problems, 1998.
68.
A. Fre` ville, The multidimensional 01 knapsack problem: An overview. European
Journal of Operational Research, 155(1):121, 2004.
69.
M. Ehrgott and X. Gandibleux, A survey and annotated bibliography of multi-
objective combinatorial optimization, OR Spectrum, 22(4):425460, 2000.
70.
D. Pisinger, Where are the hard knapsack problems? Computers & Operations
Research, 32(9):22712284, 2005.
71.
J. Marques, F. Sauve, and A. Moura, Business-oriented capacity planning of
IT infrastructure to handle load surges, in Proceedings of The 10th IEEE/
IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium (NOMS06), Vancouver,
Canada, April 2006.
72.
X. Zhu, D. Young, B. J. Watson, Z. Wang, J. Rolia, S. Singhal, B. McKee, C.
Hyser, D. Gmach, R. Gardner, T. Christian, and L. Cherkasova, 1000 Islands:
Integrated capacity and workload management for the next generation data center,
in Proceedings of The 5th IEEE International Autonomic Computing Conference
(ICAC’08), Chicago. IL, June 2008, pp. 172181.
REFERENCES
191


CHAPTER 7
ENHANCING CLOUD COMPUTING
ENVIRONMENTS USING A CLUSTER
AS A SERVICE
MICHAEL BROCK and ANDRZEJ GOSCINSKI
7.1
INTRODUCTION
The emergence of cloud computing has caused a signiﬁcant change in how IT
infrastructures are provided to research and business organizations. Instead of
paying for expensive hardware and incur excessive maintenance costs, it is now
possible to rent the IT infrastructure of other organizations for a minimal fee.
While the existence of cloud computing is new, the elements used to create
clouds have been around for some time. Cloud computing systems have been
made possible through the use of large-scale clusters, service-oriented archi-
tecture (SOA), Web services, and virtualization.
While the idea of offering resources via Web services is commonplace in
cloud computing, little attention has been paid to the clients themselves—
speciﬁcally, human operators. Despite that clouds host a variety of resources
which in turn are accessible to a variety of clients, support for human users is
minimal.
Proposed in this chapter is the Cluster as a Service (CaaS), a Web service for
exposing via WSDL and for discovering and using clusters to run jobs.1 Because
the WSDL document is the most commonly exploited object of a Web service,
the inclusion of state and other information in the WSDL document makes the
Cloud Computing: Principles and Paradigms,
Edited by Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg and
Andrzej Goscinski
Copyright r 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
1Jobs contain programs, data and management scripts. A process is a program that is in execution.
When clients use a cluster, they submit jobs and when the jobs which are run by clusters creating
one or more processes.
193
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>


internal activity of the Web services publishable. This chapter offers a cloud
higher layer abstraction and support for users. From the virtualization point of
view the CaaS is an interface for clusters that makes their discovery, selection,
and use easier.
The rest of this chapter is structured as follows. Section 7.2 discusses three
well-known clouds. Section 7.3 gives a brief explanation of the dynamic
attribute and Web service-based Resources Via Web Services (RVWS) frame-
work [1, 2], which forms a basis of the CaaS. Section 7.4 presents the logical
design of our CaaS solution. Section 7.5 presents a proof of concept where a
cluster is published, found, and used. Section 7.6 provides a conclusion.
7.2
RELATED WORK
In this section, four major clouds are examined to learn what is offered to
clients in terms of higher layer abstraction and support for users—in particular,
service and resource publication, discovery, selection, and use. While the focus
of this chapter is to simplify the exposure of clusters as Web services, it is
important to learn what problems exist when attempting to expose any form of
resource via a Web service.
Depending on what services and resources are offered, clouds belong to one
of three basic cloud categories: Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a
Service (PaaS), and Software as a Service (SaaS). IaaS clouds make basic
computational resources (e.g., storage, servers) available as services over the
Internet. PaaS clouds offer easy development and deployment for environments
scalable applications. SaaS clouds allow complete end user applications to be
deployed, managed, and delivered as a service usually through a browser over
the Internet. SaaS clouds only support provider’s applications on their
infrastructure.
The well-known four clouds—EC2 [3], Azure [4], AppEngine [5], and
Salesforce [16]—represent these three basic cloud categories well.
7.2.1
Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2)
An IaaS cloud, EC2 offers “elastic” access to hardware resources that EC2
clients use to create virtual servers. Inside the virtual servers, clients either host
the applications they wish to run or host services of their own to access over the
Internet. As demand for the services inside the virtual machine rises, it is
possible to create a duplicate (instance) of the virtual machine and distribute
the load across the instances.
The ﬁrst problem with EC2 is its low level of abstraction. Tutorials [68]
show that when using EC2, clients have to create a virtual machine, install
software into it, upload the virtual machine to EC2, and then use a command
line tool to start it. Even though EC2 has a set of pre-built virtual machines that
194
ENHANCING CLOUD COMPUTING ENVIRONMENTS USING A CLUSTER AS A SERVICE


EC2 clients can use [9], it still falls on the clients to ensure that their own
software is installed and then conﬁgured correctly.
It was only recently that Amazon announced new scalability features,
speciﬁcally Auto-Scaling [10] and Elastic Load Balancing [10]. Before the
announcement of these services, it fell to EC2 clients to either modify their
services running on EC2 or install additional management software into
their EC2 virtual servers. While the offering of Auto-Scaling and Elastic Load
Balancing reduces the modiﬁcation needed for services hosted on EC2, both
services are difﬁcult to use and require client involvement [11, 12]. In both cases,
it is required of the EC2 client to have a reserve of virtual servers and then
conﬁgure Auto-Scaling and Elastic Load Balancing to make use of the virtual
servers based on demand.
Finally, EC2 does not provide any means for publishing services by other
providers, nor does it provide the discovery and selection of services within
EC2. An analysis of EC2 documentation [13] shows that network multicasting
(a vital element to discovery) is not allowed, thus making discovery and
selection of services within EC2 difﬁcult. After services are hosted inside the
virtual machines on EC2, clients are required to manually publish their services
to a discovery service external to EC2.
7.2.2
Google App Engine
Google App Engine [5] is a PaaS cloud that provides a complete Web service
environment: All required hardware, operating systems, and software are
provided to clients. Thus, clients only have to focus on the installation or
creation of their own services, while App Engine runs the services on Google’s
servers.
However, App Engine is very restricted in what language can be used to
build services. At the time of writing, App Engine only supports the Java and
Python programming languages. If one is not familiar with any of the supported
programming languages, the App Engine client has to learn the language before
building his or her own services. Furthermore, existing applications cannot
simply be placed on App Engine: Only services written completely in Java and
Python are supported.
Finally, App Engine does not contain any support to publish services created
by other service providers, nor does it provide discovery and selection services.
After creating and hosting their services, clients have to publish their services to
discovery services external to App Engine. At the time of writing, an examina-
tion of the App Engine code pages [24] also found no matches when the
keyword “discovery” was used as a search string.
7.2.3
Microsoft Windows Azure
Another PaaS cloud, Microsoft’s Azure [4] allows clients to build services using
developer libraries which make use of communication, computational, and
storage services in Azure and then simply upload the completed services.
7.2
RELATED WORK
195


To ease service-based development, Azure also provides a discovery service
within the cloud itself. Called the .NET Service Bus [14], services hosted in
Azure are published once and are locatable even if they are frequently moved.
When a service is created/started, it publishes itself to the Bus using a URI [15]
and then awaits requests from clients.
While it is interesting that the service can move and still be accessible as long
as the client uses the URI, how the client gets the URI is not addressed.
Furthermore, it appears that no other information such as state or quality of
service (QoS) can be published to the Bus, only the URI.
7.2.4
Salesforce
Salesforce [16] is a SaaS cloud that offers customer relations management
(CRM) software as a service. Instead of maintaining hardware and software
licenses, clients use the software hosted on Salesforce servers for a minimal fee.
Clients of Salesforce use the software as though it is their own one and do not
have to worry about software maintenance costs. This includes the provision of
hardware, the installation, and all required software and the routine updates.
However, Salesforce is only applicable for clients who need existing soft-
ware. Salesforce only offers CRM software and does not allow the hosting of
custom services. So while it is the cloud with the greatest ease of use, Salesforce
has the least ﬂexibility.
7.2.5
Cloud Summary
While there is much promise with the four major clouds presented in this
chapter, all have a problem when it comes to publishing a discovering required
services and resources. Put simply, discovery is close to nonexistent and some
clouds require signiﬁcant involvement from their clients.
Of all the clouds examined, only Azure offers a discovery service. However,
the discovery service in Azure only addresses static attributes. The .NET
Service Bus only allows for the publication of unique identiﬁers.
Furthermore, current cloud providers assume that human users of clouds
are experienced programmers. There is no consideration for clients that are
specialists in other ﬁelds such as business analysis and engineering. Hence,
when interface tools are provided, they are primitive and only usable by
computing experts. Ease of use needs to be available to both experienced and
novice computing users.
What is needed is an approach to provide higher layer abstraction and
support for users through the provision of simple publication, discovery,
selection, and use of resources. In this chapter, the resource focused on is a
cluster. Clients should be able to easily place required ﬁles and executables on
the cluster and get the results back without knowing any cluster speciﬁcs. We
propose to exploit Web services to provide a higher level of abstraction and
offer these services.
196
ENHANCING CLOUD COMPUTING ENVIRONMENTS USING A CLUSTER AS A SERVICE


7.3
RVWS DESIGN
While Web services have simpliﬁed resource access and management, it is not
possible to know if the resource(s) behind the Web service is (are) ready for
requests. Clients need to exchange numerous messages with required Web
services to learn the current activity of resources and thus face signiﬁcant
overhead loss if most of the Web services prove ineffective. Furthermore, even
in ideal circumstances where all resources behind Web services are the best
choice, clients still have to locate the services themselves. Finally, the Web
services have to be stateful so that they are able to best reﬂect the current state
of their resources.
This was the motivation for creating the RVWS framework. The novelty of
RVWS is that it combines dynamic attributes, stateful Web services (aware
of their past activity), stateful and dynamic WSDL documents [1], and
brokering [17] into a single, effective, service-based framework. Regardless
of clients accessing services directly or discovering them via a broker, clients of
RVWS-based distributed systems spend less time learning of services.
7.3.1
Dynamic Attribute Exposure
There are two categories of dynamic attributes addressed in the RVWS
framework: state and characteristic. State attributes cover the current activity
of the service and its resources, thus indicating readiness. For example, a Web
service that exposes a cluster (itself a complex resource) would most likely have
a dynamic state attribute that indicates how many nodes in the cluster are busy
and how many are idle.
Characteristic attributes cover the operational features of the service, the
resources behind it, the quality of service (QoS), price and provider informa-
tion. Again with the cluster Web service example, a possible characteristic is an
array of support software within the cluster. This is important information as
cluster clients need to know what software libraries exist on the cluster.
Figure 7.1 shows the steps on how to make Web services stateful and how
the dynamic attributes of resources are presented to clients via the WSDL
document.
To keep the stateful Web service current, a Connector [2] is used to detect
changes in resources and then inform the Web service. The Connector has three
logical modules: Detection, Decision, and Notiﬁcation. The Detection module
routinely queries the resource for attribute information (12). Any changes in
the attributes are passed to the Decision module (3) that decides if the attribute
change is large enough to warrant a notiﬁcation. This prevents excessive
communication with the Web service. Updated attributes are passed on to
the Notiﬁcation module (4), which informs the stateful Web service (5) that
updates its internal state. When clients requests the stateful WSDL document
(6), the Web service returns the WSDL document with the values of all
attributes (7) at the request time.
7.3
RVWS DESIGN
197


7.3.2
Stateful WSDL Document Creation
When exposing the dynamic attributes of resources, the RVWS framework
allows Web services to expose the dynamic attributes through the WSDL
documents of Web services. The Web Service Description Language (WSDL)
[18] governs a schema that describes a Web service and a document written in
the schema. In this chapter, the term WSDL refers to the stateless WSDL
document. Stateful WSDL document refers to the WSDL document created by
RVWS Web services.
All information of service resources is kept in a new WSDL section called
Resources. Figure 7.2 shows the structure of the Resources section with the rest
of the WSDL document. For each resource behind the Web service, a
ResourceInfo section exists.
Each ResourceInfo section has a resource-id attribute and two child
sections: state and characteristic. All resources behind the Web service have
unique identiﬁers. When the Connector learns of the resource for the ﬁrst time,
it publishes the resource to the Web service.
Both the state and characteristics elements contain several description
elements, each with a name attribute and (if the provider wishes) one or
more attributes of the service. Attributes in RVWS use the {name: op value}
notations. An example attribute is {cost: ,5 $5}.
The state of a resource could be very complex and cannot be described in just
one attribute. For example, variations in each node in the cluster all contribute
signiﬁcantly to the state of the cluster. Thus the state in RVWS is described via
a collection of attributes, all making up the whole state.
The characteristics section describes near-static attributes of resources such
as their limitations and data parameters. For example, the type of CPU on a
node in a cluster is described in this section.
Connector
Detection
Decision
Notific.
1.
2.
3.
4.
Web Service
5.
State Attrib.
Characteristic Attrib.
Resource
State Attrib.
Characteristic Attrib.
7.
Client
6.
FIGURE 7.1. Exposing resource attributes.
198
ENHANCING CLOUD COMPUTING ENVIRONMENTS USING A CLUSTER AS A SERVICE


7.3.3
Publication in RVWS
While the stateful WSDL document eliminates the overhead incurred from
manually learning the attributes of the service and its resource(s), the issues
behind discovering services are still unresolved.
To help ease the publication and discovery of required services with stateful
WSDL documents, a Dynamic Broker was proposed (Figure 7.3) [17]. The goal
of the Dynamic Broker is to provide an effective publication and discovery
service based on service, resource, and provider dynamic attributes.
When publishing to the Broker (1), the provider sends attributes of the Web
service to the Dynamic Broker. The dynamic attributes indicate the fun-
ctionality, cost, QoS, and any other attributes the provider wishes to have
published about the service. Furthermore, the provider is able to publish
information about itself, such as the provider’s contact details and reputation.
After publication (1), the Broker gets the stateful WSDL document from
the Web service (2). After getting the stateful WSDL document, the Dynamic
Broker extracts all resource dynamic attributes from the stateful WSDL
documents
and
stores
the
resource
attributes
in
the
resources
store.
<definitions xmlns:wsdl="http://schemas.xmlsoap.org/wsdl/">
<resources>
<resource-info identifier="resourceID">
<state>
<description name="" attribute1="value1" … 
attributen="valuen">
…Other description Elements…
</description>
…Other description Elements…
</state>
<characteristics>
<description name="" />
…Other description Elements…
</characteristics>
</resource-info>
…Other resource-info elements
</resources>
<types>...</types>
message name="MethodSoapIn">...</message>
<message name="MethodSoapOut">...</message>
<portType name="CounterServiceSoap">...</portType>
<binding name="CounterServiceSoap" 
type="tns:CounterServiceSoap">...</wsdl:binding>
<wsdl:service name="CounterService">...</wsdl:service>
</wsdl:definitions>
FIGURE 7.2. New WSDL section.
7.3
RVWS DESIGN
199


The Dynamic Broker then stores the (stateless) WSDL document and service
attributes from (1) in the service store. Finally, all attributes about the provider
are placed in the providers store.
As the Web service changes, it is able to send a notiﬁcation to the Broker (3)
which then updates the relevant attribute in the relevant store. Had all
information about each service been kept in a single stateful WSDL document,
the dynamic broker would have spent a lot of time load, thereby editing and
saving huge XML documents to the database.
7.3.4
Automatic Discovery and Selection
The automatic service discovery that takes into consideration dynamic attri-
butes in their WSDL documents allows service (e.g., a cluster) discovery.
When discovering services, the client submits to the Dynamic Broker three
groups of requirements (1 in Figure 7.4): service, resource, and provider.
The Dynamic Broker compares each requirement group on the related data
store (2). Then, after getting matches, the Broker applies ﬁltering (3). As the
client using the Broker could vary from human operators to other software
units, the resulting matches have to be ﬁltered to suit the client. Finally, the
ﬁltered results are returned to the client (4).
The automatic service selection that takes into consideration dynamic
attributes in their WSDL documents allows for both a single service (e.g., a
cluster) selection and an orchestration of services to satisfy workﬂow require-
ments (Figure 7.5).
The SLA (service-level agreement) reached by the client and cloud service
provider speciﬁes attributes of services that form the client’s request or
workﬂow. This is followed by the process of services’ selection using Brokers.
Thus, selection is carried out automatically and transparently. In a system
comprising many clouds, the set of attributes is partitioned over many
distributed service databases, for autonomy, scalability, and performance.
Web Service
State Attrib.
Characteristic Attrib.
Provider
Dynamic Broker
Publication
Notication
Providers
Services
Resources
Distributed
Broker Data 
1.
2.
3.
FIGURE 7.3. Publication.
200
ENHANCING CLOUD COMPUTING ENVIRONMENTS USING A CLUSTER AS A SERVICE


The automatic selection of services is performed to optimize a function
reﬂecting client requirements. Time-critical and high-throughput tasks beneﬁt
by executing a computing intensive application on multiple clusters exposed as
services of one or many clouds.
Public Cloud
Service
Service
Public Cloud
Public Cloud
Broker
Broker
Selection
Workflow
Client
SLA
Cloud
Provider
Negotiation
= <Si1, Si2, Si3 ... Sin> 
Composition
FIGURE 7.5. Dynamic discovery and selection.
Dynamic Broker
Matching
Providers
Services
Resources
Dynamic
Broker Data 
Filtering
Client
1.
4.
3.
2.
FIGURE 7.4. Matching parameters to attributes.
7.3
RVWS DESIGN
201


The dynamic attribute information only relates to clients that are aware
of them. Human clients know what the attributes are, owning to the section
being clearly named. Software-client-designed pre-RVWS ignore the additional
information as they follow the WSDL schema that we have not changed.
7.4
CLUSTER AS A SERVICE: THE LOGICAL DESIGN
Simpliﬁcation of the use of clusters could only be achieved through higher layer
abstraction that is proposed here to be implemented using the service-based
Cluster as a Service (CaaS) Technology. The purpose of the CaaS Technology
is to ease the publication, discovery, selection, and use of existing computa-
tional clusters.
7.4.1
CaaS Overview
The exposure of a cluster via a Web service is intricate and comprises several
services running on top of a physical cluster. Figure 7.6 shows the complete
CaaS technology.
A typical cluster is comprised of three elements: nodes, data storage, and
middleware. The middleware virtualizes the cluster into a single system image;
thus resources such as the CPU can be used without knowing the organization
of the cluster. Of interest to this chapter are the components that manage
the allocation of jobs to nodes (scheduler) and that monitor the activity of the
cluster (monitor). As time progresses, the amount of free memory, disk space,
and CPU usage of each cluster node changes. Information about how quickly
the scheduler can take a job and start it on the cluster also is vital in choosing a
cluster.
To make information about the cluster publishable, a Publisher Web service
and Connector were created using the RVWS framework. The purpose of the
publisher Web service was to expose the dynamic attributes of the cluster via
the stateful WSDL document. Furthermore, the Publisher service is published
to the Dynamic Broker so clients can easily discover the cluster.
To ﬁnd clusters, the CaaS Service makes use of the Dynamic Broker. While
the Broker is detailed in returning dynamic attributes of matching services, the
results from the Dynamic Broker are too detailed for the CaaS Service. Thus
another role of the CaaS Service is to “summarize” the result data so that they
convey fewer details.
Ordinarily, clients could ﬁnd required clusters but they still had to manually
transfer their ﬁles, invoke the scheduler, and get the results back. All three tasks
require knowledge of the cluster and are conducted using complex tools. The
role of the CaaS Service is to (i) provide easy and intuitive ﬁle transfer tools so
clients can upload jobs and download results and (ii) offer an easy to use
interface for clients to monitor their jobs. The CaaS Service does this by
202
ENHANCING CLOUD COMPUTING ENVIRONMENTS USING A CLUSTER AS A SERVICE


allowing clients to upload ﬁles as they would any Web page while carrying out
the required data transfer to the cluster transparently.
Because clients to the cluster cannot know how the data storage is managed,
the CaaS Service offers a simple transfer interface to clients while addressing the
transfer speciﬁcs. Finally, the CaaS Service communicates with the cluster’s
scheduler, thus freeing the client from needing to know how the scheduler is
invoked when submitting and monitoring jobs.
7.4.2
Cluster Stateful WSDL Document
As stated in Section 7.4.1, the purpose of the Publisher Web service is to expose the
dynamic attributes of a cluster via a stateful WSDL document. Figure 7.7 shows
the resources section to be added to the WSDL of the Publisher Web service.
Inside the state and characteristic elements, an XML element for each cluster
node was created. The advantage of the XML structuring of our cluster
Scheduler
Monitoring
Cluster Middleware
Node 1 
Node n
Cluster Nodes
Data Storage
Example Cluster
CaaS Service
Publisher Service
Connector
Software Service
Dynamic Broker
Human Operator
Clients
FIGURE 7.6. Complete CaaS system.
7.4
CLUSTER AS A SERVICE: THE LOGICAL DESIGN
203


attributes means that comparing client requirements to resource attributes only
requires using XPath queries.
For the CaaS Service to properly support the role of cluster discovery,
detailed information about clusters and their nodes needs to be published to the
WSDL of the cluster and subsequently to the Broker (Table 7.1).
7.4.3
CaaS Service Design
The CaaS service can be described as having four main tasks: cluster discovery
and selection, result organization, job management, and ﬁle management.
Based
on
these
tasks,
the
CaaS
Service
has
been
designed
using
<definitions xmlns:wsdl="http://schemas.xmlsoap.org/wsdl/">
<resources>
<resource-info resource-identifier="resourceId">
<state element-identifier="elementId">
<cluster-state element-identifier="cluster-state-root">
<cluster-node-name free-disk="" free-memory="" native-os-name="" 
native-os-version="" processes-count="" 
processes-running="" cpu-usage-percent=""
element-identifier="stateElementId" 
memory-free-percent="" />
…Other Cluster Node State Elements…
</cluster-state>
</state>
<characteristics element-identifier="characteristicElementId">
<cluster-characteristics node-count="" 
element-identifier="cluster-characteristics-root">
<cluster-node-name core-count="" core-speed="" core-speed-unit="" 
hardware-architecture="" total-disk="" total-memory=""
total-disk-unit="" total-memory-unit=""
element-identifier="characteristicElementId" />
…Other Cluster Node Characteristic Elements…
</cluster-characteristics>
</characteristics>
</resource-info>
</resources>
<types>...
<message name="MethodSoapIn">...
<message name="MethodSoapOut">...
<portType name="CounterServiceSoap">...
<binding name="CounterServiceSoap" …>...
<wsdl:service name="CounterService">...
</wsdl:definitions>
FIGURE 7.7. Cluster WSDL.
204
ENHANCING CLOUD COMPUTING ENVIRONMENTS USING A CLUSTER AS A SERVICE


TABLE 7.1. Cluster Attributes
Type
Attribute Name
Attribute Description
Source
Characteristics
core-count
Number of cores on a cluster
node
Cluster node
core-speed
Speed of each core
core-speed-unit
Unit for the core speed (e.g.,
gigahertz)
hardware-
architecture
Hardware architecture of each
cluster node (e.g., 32-bit Intel)
total-disk
Total amount of physical
storage space
total-disk-unit
Storage amount unit (e.g.,
gigabytes)
total-memory
Total amount of physical
memory
total-memory-unit
Memory amount measurement
(e.g., gigabytes)
software-name
Name of an installed piece of
software.
software-version
Version of a installed piece of
software
software-
architecture
Architecture of a installed piece
of software
node-count
Total number of nodes in the
cluster. Node count differs
from core-count as each node
in a cluster can have many
cores.
Generated
State
free-disk
Amount of free disk space
Cluster node
free-memory
Amount of free memory
os-name
Name of the installed operating
system
os-version
Version of the running
operating system
processes-count
Number of processes
processes-running
Number of processes running
cpu-usage-percent
Overall percent of CPU used.
As this metric is for the node
itself, this value becomes
averaged over cluster core
Generated
memory-free-
percent
Amount of free memory on the
cluster node


intercommunicating modules. Each module in the CaaS Service encapsulates
one of the tasks and is able to communicate with other modules to extend its
functionality.
Figure 7.8 presents the modules with the CaaS Service and illustrates the
dependencies between them. To improve the description, elements from
Figure 7.6 have been included to show what other entities are used by the
CaaS service.
The modules inside the CaaS Web service are only accessed through an
interface. The use of the interface means the Web service can be updated over
time without requiring clients to be updated nor modiﬁed.
Invoking an operation on the CaaS Service Interface (discovery, etc.)
invokes operations on various modules. Thus, to best describe the role each
module plays, the following sections outline the various tasks that the CaaS
Service carries out.
Cluster Discovery. Before a client uses a cluster, a cluster must be discovered
and selected ﬁrst. Figure 7.9 shows the workﬂow on ﬁnding a required cluster.
To start, clients submit cluster requirements in the form of attribute values to
the CaaS Service Interface (1). The requirements range from the number of
nodes in the cluster to the installed software (both operating systems and
software APIs). The CaaS Service Interface invokes the Cluster Finder module
(2) that communicates with the Dynamic Broker (3) and returns service
matches (if any).
To address the detailed results from the Broker, the Cluster Finder module
invokes the Results Organizer module (4) that takes the Broker results and
returns an organized version that is returned to the client (56). The organized
Scheduler
Example Cluster
Data Storage
Result Organizer
Cluster Finder
Job Manager
File Manager
CaaS Service Interface
Client
Dynamic
Broker 
FIGURE 7.8. CaaS Service design.
206
ENHANCING CLOUD COMPUTING ENVIRONMENTS USING A CLUSTER AS A SERVICE


results instruct the client what clusters satisfy the speciﬁed requirements.
After reviewing the results, the client chooses a cluster.
Job Submission. After selecting a required cluster, all executables and data
ﬁles have to be transferred to the cluster and the job submitted to the scheduler
for execution. As clusters vary signiﬁcantly in the software middleware used to
create them, it can be difﬁcult to place jobs on the cluster. To do so requires
knowing how jobs are stored and how they are queued for execution on the
cluster. Figure 7.10 shows how the CaaS Service simpliﬁes the use of a cluster to
the point where the client does not have to know about the underlying
middleware.
Result Organizer
Cluster Finder
CaaS Service Interface
Dynamic Broker
Client
1.
6.
2.
5.
3.
4.
FIGURE 7.9. Cluster discovery.
Job Manager
File Manager
CaaS Service
Interface 
Client
Scheduler
Example Cluster
Data Storage
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
FIGURE 7.10. Job submission.
7.4
CLUSTER AS A SERVICE: THE LOGICAL DESIGN
207


All required data, parameters, such as estimated runtime, are uploaded to
the CaaS Service (1). Once the ﬁle upload is complete, the Job Manager is
invoked (2). It resolves the transfer of all ﬁles to the cluster by invoking the File
Manager (3) that makes a connection to the cluster storage and commences the
transfer of all ﬁles (4).
Upon completion of the transfer (4), the outcome is reported back to the Job
Manager (5). On failure, a report is sent and the client can decide on the
appropriate action to take. If the ﬁle transfer was successful, the Job Manager
invokes the scheduler on the cluster (6).
The same parameters the client gave to the CaaS Service Interface are
submitted to the scheduler; the only difference being that the Job Manager
also informs the scheduler where the job is kept so it can be started. If the
outcome of the scheduler (6) is successful, the client is then informed (78).
The outcome includes the response from the scheduler, the job identiﬁer the
scheduler gave to the job, and any other information the scheduler provides.
Job Monitoring. During execution, clients should be able to view the
execution progress of their jobs. Even though the cluster is not the owned by
the client, the job is. Thus, it is the right of the client to see how the job is
progressing and (if the client decides) terminate the job and remove it from the
cluster. Figure 7.11. outlines the workﬂow the client takes when querying about
job execution.
First, the client contacts the CaaS service interface (1) that invokes the Job
Manager module (2). No matter what the operation is (check, pause, or
terminate), the Job Manager only has to communicate with the scheduler (3)
and reports back a successful outcome to the client (45).
Result Collection. The ﬁnal role of the CaaS Service is addressing
jobs that have terminated or completed their execution successfully. In both
Job Manager
CaaS Service 
Interface 
Scheduler
Example Cluster
Client
1.
5.
2.
4.
3.
FIGURE 7.11. Job monitoring.
208
ENHANCING CLOUD COMPUTING ENVIRONMENTS USING A CLUSTER AS A SERVICE


cases, error or data ﬁles need to be transferred to the client. Figure 7.12 presents
the workﬂow and CaaS Service modules used to retrieve error or result ﬁles
from the cluster.
Clients start the error or result ﬁle transfer by contacting the CaaS Service
Interface (1) that then invokes the File Manager (2) to retrieve the ﬁles from the
cluster’s data storage (3). If there is a transfer error, the File Manager attempts
to resolve the issue ﬁrst before informing the client. If the transfer of ﬁles (3) is
successful, the ﬁles are returned to the CaaS Service Interface (4) and then the
client (5). When returning the ﬁles, URL link or a FTP address is provided so
the client can retrieve the ﬁles.
7.4.4
User Interface: CaaS Web Pages
The CaaS Service has to support at least two forms of client: software clients
and human operator clients. Software clients could be other software applica-
tions or services and thus are able to communicate with the CaaS Service
Interface directly.
For human operators to use the CaaS Service, a series of Web pages has been
designed. Each page in the series covers a step in the process of discovering,
selecting, and using a cluster. Figure 7.13 shows the Cluster Speciﬁcation Web
page where clients can start the discovery of a required cluster.
In Section A the client is able to specify attributes about the required cluster.
Section B allows specifying any required software the cluster job needs.
Afterwards, the attributes are then given to the CaaS service that performs a
search for possible clusters and the results are displayed in a Select Cluster Web
page (Figure 7.14).
Next, the client goes to the job speciﬁcation page, Figure 7.15. Section A
allows specifying the job. Section B allows the client to specify and upload all
data ﬁles and job executables. If the job is complex, Section B also allows
specifying a job script. Job scripts are script ﬁles that describe and manage
File Manager
CaaS Service
Interface 
Client
1.
5.
Example Cluster
Data Storage
2.
4.
3.
FIGURE 7.12. Job result collection.
7.4
CLUSTER AS A SERVICE: THE LOGICAL DESIGN
209


various stages of a large cluster job. Section C allows specifying an estimated
time the job would take to complete.
Afterword, the CaaS Service attempts to submit the job; the outcome is
shown in the Job Monitoring page, Figure 7.16. Section A tells the client
whether the job is submitted successfully. Section B offers commands to allow
the client to take an appropriate action.
When the job is complete, the client is able to collect the results from the
Collect Results page (Figure 7.17). Section A shows the outcome of the job.
Number of Nodes: 50
Amount of Memory: 50
GB
Free Memory: 50
GB
Disk Free: 50
GB
Section A: Hardware
CPU: Pentium 4 
64 bit
GHz
3.2
Section B: Software
Operating System:
Windows XP w/Service Pack 2
Discover  ->
FIGURE 7.13. Web page for cluster speciﬁcation.
Hardware
Software
Number of Nodes :
Amount of Memory :
Free Memory :
Disk Free :
CPU :
Operating System :
Architecture :
Speed
Architecture :
Version :
Cluster A
select
Cluster B
select
<-  Refine Search
FIGURE 7.14. Web page for showing matching clusters.
210
ENHANCING CLOUD COMPUTING ENVIRONMENTS USING A CLUSTER AS A SERVICE


 
Job Name:
Travelling Sales Man
Job Owner
Joe Bloggs
Executible
My_exec.exe
Section A: Identification
Section B: Job File Specification
Data files:
Proven.dat
Control.dat
Recent.dat
Remove
Clear
Browse...
Script:
my_script.pl
Browse...
custom_set.dat
Browse...
Section C: Execution Specification
Estimated Tme:
3d 14h 
Output Filename:
out.dat
<-  Change Clusters
Submit  ->
Add
FIGURE 7.15. Web page for job speciﬁcation.
Outcome:
Submitted Successfully
Job ID:
cj404
Section A: Submission Outcome
Section B: Job Control
Report:
Delegating Submission request…. Request Accepted.
Job has been started.
Refresh
Pause
Halt
Collect Results  ->
FIGURE 7.16. Web page for monitoring job execution.
7.4
CLUSTER AS A SERVICE: THE LOGICAL DESIGN
211


Section B allows the client to easily download the output ﬁle generated from the
completed/aborted job via HTTP or using an FTP client.
7.5
PROOF OF CONCEPT
To demonstrate the RVWS framework and CaaS Technology, a proof of
concept was performed where an existing cluster was published, discovered,
selected, and used. It was expected that the existing cluster could be easily used
all through a Web browser and without any knowledge of the underlying
middleware.
7.5.1
CaaS Technology Implementation
The CaaS Service was implemented using Windows Communication Founda-
tions (WCF) of .NET 3.5 that uses Web services. An open source library for
building SSH clients in .NET (sharpSSH) [19] was used to build the Job and
File Managers. Because schedulers are mostly command driven, the commands
and outputs were wrapped into a Web service. Each module outlined in Section
7.4.3 is implemented as its own Web service.
The experiments were carried out on a single cluster exposed via RVWS;
communication was carried out only through the CaaS Service. To manage all
the services and databases needed to expose and use clusters via Web services,
VMware virtual machines were used. Figure 7.18 shows the complete test
environment with the contents of each virtual machine. All virtual machines
have 512 MB of virtual memory and run the Windows Server 2003. All virtual
machines run .NET 2.0; the CaaS virtual machine runs .NET 3.5.
Outcome:
Completed Successfully
Time Finished:
16:59
Section A: Execution Outcome
Section B : Results Download
Report:
After a total of 2 days and 7 hours, your job has
completed execution.  
HTTP: http://download.clustera.org/cb404/out.dat
Finish
FIGURE 7.17. Web page for collecting result ﬁles.
212
ENHANCING CLOUD COMPUTING ENVIRONMENTS USING A CLUSTER AS A SERVICE


The ﬁrst virtual machine is the Publisher Web service system. It contains the
Connector, Publisher Web service [17], and all required software libraries.
The Dynamic Broker virtual machine contains the Broker and its database. The
ﬁnal virtual machine is the CaaS virtual machine; it has the CaaS Service and a
temporary data store. To improve reliability, all ﬁle transfers between the
cluster and the client are cached. The client system is an Asus Notebook with 2
gigabytes of memory and an Intel Centrino Duo processor, and it runs the
Windows XP operating system.
7.5.2
Cluster Behind the CaaS
The cluster used in the proof of concept consists of 20 nodes plus two head
nodes (one running Linux and the other running Windows). Each node in the
cluster has two Intel Cloverton Quad Core CPUs running at 1.6 GHz,
8 gigabytes of memory, and 250 gigabytes of data storage, and all nodes are
connected via gigabit Ethernet and Inﬁniband. The head nodes are the same
except they have 1.2 terabytes of data storage.
In terms of middleware, the cluster was constructed using Sun GridEngine
[20], OpenMPI [21], and Ganglia [22]. GridEngine provided a high level of
abstraction where jobs were placed in a queue and then allocated to cluster
nodes based on policies. OpenMPI provided a common distribute application
API that hid the underlying communication system. Finally, Ganglia provided
easy access to current cluster node usage metrics.
Deakin
Connector
Publisher Web
Service 
Dynamic Broker
CaaS Service
Web Browser
Cluster
Publisher Web
Service System
{VMware VM} 
Dynamic Broker
System
{VMware VM} 
Database
Temp File Store
CaaS System
{VMware VM}
Client System
FIGURE 7.18. Complete CaaS environment.
7.5
PROOF OF CONCEPT
213


Even though there is a rich set of software middleware, the use of the
middleware itself is complex and requires invocation from command line tools.
In this proof of concept, it is expected that all the list middleware will be
abstracted so clients only see the cluster as a large supercomputer and do not
have to know about the middleware.
7.5.3
Experiments and Results
The ﬁrst experiment was the publication of the cluster to the publisher Web
service and easily discovering the cluster via the Dynamic Broker. For this
experiment, a gene folding application from UNAFold [23] was used. The
application was used because it had high CPU and memory demands. To keep
consistency between results from the publisher Web service and Dynamic
Broker, the cluster Connector was instructed to log all its actions to a text ﬁle to
later examination.
Figure 7.19 shows that after starting the Connector, the Connector was able
to learn of cluster node metrics from Ganglia, organize the captured Ganglia
metrics into attributes, and forwarded the attributes to the Publisher Web
service.
Figure 7.20 shows that the data from the Connector was also being presented
inthe stateful WSDL document. Asthe Connectorwasdetecting slightchangesin
the cluster (created from the management services), the stateful WSDL of the
cluster Web service was requested and the same information was found in
the stateful WSDL document.
22/01/2009 1:51:52 PM-Connector[Update]: 
Passing 23 attribute updates to the web service...
* Updating west-03.eit.deakin.edu.au-state in
free-memory to 7805776
* Updating west-03.eit.deakin.edu.au-state in
ready-queue-last-five-minutes to 0.00
...
Other attribute updates from various cluster nodes...
FIGURE 7.19. Connector output.
<rvwi:state rvwi:element-identifier= "resource-state">
<cluster-state>
<west-03.eit.deakin.edu.au free-memory="7805776" />
...Other Cluster Node Entries...
</cluster-state>
...Rest of Stateful WSDL...
FIGURE 7.20. Updated WSDL element.
214
ENHANCING CLOUD COMPUTING ENVIRONMENTS USING A CLUSTER AS A SERVICE


In the consistency stage, a computational and memory intense job was
started on a randomly selected node and the stateful WSDL of the Publisher
Web service requested to see if the correct cluster node was updated. The
WSDL document indicated that node 20 was running the job (Figure 7.21).
This was conﬁrmed when the output ﬁle of the Connector was examined. As the
cluster changed, both the Connector and the Publisher Web service were kept
current.
After publication, the Dynamic Broker was used to discover the newly
published Web service. A functional attribute of {main: 5 monitor} was
speciﬁed for the discovery. Figure 7.22 shows the Dynamic Broker discovery
results with the location of the Publisher Web service and its matching dynamic
attribute.
At this point, all the cluster nodes were being shown because no require-
ments on the state nor the characteristics of the cluster were speciﬁed. The
purpose of the selection stage of this experiment is intended to ensure that when
given client attribute values, the Dynamic Broker only returned matching
attribute.
For this stage, only loaded cluster nodes were required; thus a state attribute
value of {cpu_usage_percent: >10} was speciﬁed. Figure 7.23 shows the
Dynamic Broker results only indicating node 20 as a loaded cluster node.
<west-20.eit.deakin.edu.au 
cpu-system-usage="1.5"
cpu-usage-percent="16.8"
free-memory="12104"
memory-free-percent="0.001489594" />
FIGURE 7.21. Loaded cluster node element.
<ArrayOfServiceMatch>
<ServiceMatch>
<Url >http://einstein/rvws/rvwi_cluster /
ClusterMonitorService.asmx</Url>
<Wsdl>...Service Stateful WSDL...</Wsdl>
<Metadata>
<service-meta>
<Functionalty main="monitor" /> 
...Other Provider Attributes...
</service-meta>
</Metadata>
</ServiceMatch>
</ArrayOfServiceMatch>
FIGURE 7.22. Service match results from dynamic broker.
7.5
PROOF OF CONCEPT
215


The ﬁnal test was to load yet another randomly selected cluster node. This
time, the cluster node was to be discovered using only the Dynamic Broker and
without looking at the Connector or the Publisher Web service. Once a job was
placed on a randomly selected cluster node, the Dynamic Broker was queried
with the same attribute values that generated Figure 7.23.
Figure 7.24 shows the Dynamic Broker results indicating node 3 as a loaded
cluster node. Figure 7.25 shows an excerpt from the Connector text ﬁle that
conﬁrmed that node 3 had recently changed state.
Figure 7.26 shows the ﬁlled-in Web form from the browser. Figure 7.27
shows the outcome of our cluster discovery. This outcome is formatted like that
shown in Figure 7.14. As the cluster was now being successfully published, it
was possible to test the rest of the CaaS solution.
Figure 7.26 shows the ﬁlled in Web form from the browser. Figure 7.27
shows the outcome of our cluster discovery, formatted like that shown in
Figure 7.14. Because only the Deakin cluster was present, that cluster was
chosen to run our job. For our example job, we speciﬁed the script, data ﬁles,
and a desired return ﬁle.
Figure 7.28 shows the complete form. For this proof of concept, the cluster
job was simple: Run UNIX grep over a text ﬁle and return another text ﬁle with
lines that match our required pattern. While small, all the functionality of the
CaaS service is used: The script and data ﬁle had to be uploaded and then
submitted, to the scheduler, and the result ﬁle had to be returned.
Onceourjobwasspeciﬁed,clickingthe“Submit”buttonwasexpectedtoupload
the ﬁles to the CaaS virtual machine and then transfer the ﬁles to the cluster. Once
the page in Figure 7.29 was presented to us, we examined both the CaaS virtual
machine and cluster data store. In both cases, we found our script and data ﬁle.
After seeing the output of the Job Monitoring page, we contacted the cluster
and queried the scheduler to see if information on the page was correct. The job
listed on the page was given the ID of 3888, and we found the same job listed as
running with the scheduler.
One ﬁnal test was seeing if the Job Monitoring Web page was able to check
the state of our job and (if ﬁnished) allows us to collect our result ﬁle. We got
conﬁrmation that our job had completed, and we were able to proceed to the
Results Collection page.
<west-20.eit.deakin.edu.au
cpu-usage-percent="64.3" />
FIGURE 7.23. The only state element returned.
<west-03.eit.deakin.edu.au cpu-usage-percent="12.5" />
<west-20.eit.deakin.edu.au cpu-usage-percent="63" />
FIGURE 7.24. Cluster nodes returned from the broker.
216
ENHANCING CLOUD COMPUTING ENVIRONMENTS USING A CLUSTER AS A SERVICE


22/01/2009 2:00:58 PM-Connector[Update]: 
Passing 36 attribute updates to the web service...
* Updating west-03.eit.deakin.edu.au-state in
cpu-usage-percent to 12.5
FIGURE 7.25. Text ﬁle entry from the connector.
Number of Nodes:
Gigabyte
Gigabyte
Gigabyte
GigaHertz
32-bit
Section A: Hardware
Section B: Software
Operating System:
Amount of Memory:
Free Memory:
Disk Free:
CPU:
Any Linux
20
8130000
7400000
FIGURE 7.26. Cluster speciﬁcation.
Deakin
Use Selected
Hardware
Cluster
Mem. Amount
Deakin
Nodes
Mem. Free Disk Free
CPU Speed
OS Name
OS Archi.
OS Ver.
CPU Archi.
20
9
9
3
–
–
–
–
20
Software
FIGURE 7.27. Cluster selection.
Executible:
Script:
Data Files:
Name of Output File:
C:\collection\data.zip
cats.txt
Browse_
Browse_
Browse_
Section B: Job File Submission
C:\collection\execution.s
FIGURE 7.28. Job speciﬁcation.
7.5
PROOF OF CONCEPT
217


The collection of result ﬁle(s) starts when the “Collect Results” button (shown
in Figure 7.16) is clicked. It was expected that by this time the result ﬁle would
have been copied to the CaaS virtual machine. Once the collection Web page was
displayed(Figure 7.30), we checked the virtual machineandfoundour results ﬁle.
7.6
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
In terms of future research for the RVWS framework and CaaS technology, the
ﬁelds of load management, security, and SLA negotiation are open. Load
management is a priority because loaded clusters should be able to ofﬂoad their
jobs to other known clusters. In future work, we plan to expose another cluster
using the same CaaS technology and evaluate its performance with two
clusters.
At the time of writing, the Dynamic Broker within the RVWS framework
considers all published services and resources to be public: There is no support
for paid access or private services. In the future, the RVWS framework has to
be enhanced so that service providers have greater control over how services are
published and who accesses them.
SLA negotiation is also a ﬁeld of interest. Currently, if the Dynamic Broker
cannot ﬁnd matching services and resources, the Dynamic Broker returns no
results. To better support a service-based environment, the Dynamic Broker
needs to be enhanced to allow it to delegate service attributes with service
providers. For example, the Dynamic Broker needs to be enhanced to try and
“barter” down the price of a possible service if it matches all other requirements.
Section A: Submission Outcome
Outcome: Your job 38888 (execution.sh) has been submitted
Report: 26/05/2009 10:39:03 AM: You job is still running.
26/05/2009 10:39:55 AM: You job appears to have finished.
26/05/2009 10:39:55 AM: Please collect your result files.
Job ID: 38888
FIGURE 7.29. Job monitoring.
Section B: Result File Download
HTTP: cats.txt
FTP:
FIGURE 7.30. Result collection.
218
ENHANCING CLOUD COMPUTING ENVIRONMENTS USING A CLUSTER AS A SERVICE


7.7
CONCLUSION
While cloud computing has emerged as a new economical approach for
sourcing organization IT infrastructures, cloud computing is still in its infancy
and suffers from poor ease of use and a lack of service discovery. To improve
the use of clouds, we proposed the RVWS framework to improve publication,
discovery, selection, and use of cloud services and resources.
We have achieved the goal of this project by the development of a
technology for building Cluster as a Service (CaaS) using the RVWS frame-
work. Through the combination of dynamic attributes, Web service’s WSDL
and brokering, we successfully created a Web service that quickly and easily
published, discovered, and selected a cluster and allowed us to specify a job and
we execute it, and we ﬁnally got the result ﬁle back.
The easy publication, discovery, selection, and use of the cluster are
signiﬁcant outcomes because clusters are one of the most complex resources
in computing. Because we were able to simplify the use of a cluster, it is
possible to use the same approach to simplify any other form of resource from
databases to complete hardware systems. Furthermore, our proposed solution
provides a new higher level of abstraction for clouds that supports cloud users.
No matter the background of the user, all users are able to access clouds in the
same easy-to-use manner.
REFERENCES
1.
M. Brock and A. Goscinski, State aware WSDL, in Sixth Australasian Symposium
on Grid Computing and e-Research (AusGrid 2008). Wollongong, Australia, 82,
January 2008, pp. 3544.
2.
M. Brock and A. Goscinski, Publishing dynamic state changes of resources
through state aware WSDL, in International Conference on Web Services
(ICWS) 2008. Beijing, September 2326, 2008, pp. 449456.
3.
Amazon, Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud. http://aws.amazon.com/ec2/, 1 August
2009.
4.
Microsoft, Azure, http://www.microsoft.com/azure/default.mspx, 5 May 2009.
5.
Google, App Engine. http://code.google.com/appengine/, 17 February 2009.
6.
P. Chaganti, Cloud computing with Amazon Web services, Part 1: Introduction.
Updated
15
March
2009,
http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/library/
ar-cloudaws1/.
7.
P. Chaganti, Cloud computing with Amazon Web services, Part 2: Storage in
the cloud with Amazon simple storage service (S3). Updated 15 March 2009,
http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/library/ar-cloudaws2/.
8.
P. Chaganti, Cloud computing with Amazon Web services, Part 3: Servers on
demand with EC2. Updated 15 March 2009, http://www.ibm.com/developer-
works/library/ar-cloudaws3/.
9.
Amazon, Amazon Machine Images. http://developer.amazonwebservices.com/
connect/kbcategory.jspa?categoryID 5 171, 28 July 2009.
REFERENCES
219


10.
Amazon, Auto Scaling. http://aws.amazon.com/autoscaling/, 28 July 2009.
11.
Amazon, Auto Scaling Developer Guide. Updated 15 May 2009, http://docs.
amazonwebservices.com/AutoScaling/latest/DeveloperGuide/, 28 July 2009.
12.
Amazon, Elastic Load Balancing Developer Guide. Updated 15 May 2009, http://
docs.amazonwebservices.com/ElasticLoadBalancing/latest/DeveloperGuide/,
28
July 2009.
13.
Amazon, Amazon EC2 Technical FAQ. http://developer.amazonwebservices.com/
connect/entry.jspa?externalID=1145, 15 May 2009.
14.
A. Skonnard, A Developer’s Guide to the Microsoft .NET Service Bus. December
2008.
15.
M. Mealling and R. Denenberg, Uniform resource identiﬁers (URIs), URLs, and
uniform resource names (URNs): Clariﬁcations and recommendations, http://
tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3305, 28 June 2009.
16.
Salesforce.com, CRM—salesforce.com, http://www.salesforce.com/.
17.
M. Brock and A. Goscinski, Supporting service oriented computing with dis-
tributed brokering and dynamic WSDL, Computing Series, 8 December, 2008,
Technical Report, C08/05, Deakin University. 2008.
18.
World Wide Web Consortium, Web Services Description Language (WSDL)
Version 2.0. Updated 23 May 2007, http://www.w3.org/TR/wsdl20-primer/,
21 June 2007.
19.
T. Gal, sharpSSH—A secure shell (SSH) library for .NET. Updated 30 October
2005, http://www.codeproject.com/KB/IP/sharpssh.aspx, 1 March 2009.
20.
Sun Microsystems, GridEngine, http://gridengine.sunsource.net/, 9 March 2009.
21.
Indiana University, Open MPI: Open source high performance computing.
Updated 14 July 2009, http://www.open-mpi.org/, 31 August 2009.
22.
Ganglia, Ganglia. Updated 9 September 2008, http://ganglia.info/, 3 November
2008.
23.
M. Zuker and N. R. Markham, UNAFold. Updated 18 January 2005, http://
dinamelt.bioinfo.rpi.edu/unafold/, 1 April 2009.
24.
Google,
Developer’s
Guide—Google
App
Engine.
http://code.google.com/
appengine/docs/, 28 June 2009.
220
ENHANCING CLOUD COMPUTING ENVIRONMENTS USING A CLUSTER AS A SERVICE


CHAPTER 8
SECURE DISTRIBUTED DATA
STORAGE IN CLOUD COMPUTING
YU CHEN, WEI-SHINN KU, JUN FENG, PU LIU, and ZHOU SU
8.1
INTRODUCTION
Cloud computing has gained great attention from both industry and academia
since 2007. With the goal of providing users more ﬂexible services in a transparent
manner, all services are allocated in a “cloud” that actually is a collection of
devices and resources connected through the Internet. One of the core services
provided by cloud computing is data storage. This poses new challenges in
creating secure and reliable data storage and access facilities over remote service
providers in the cloud. The security of data storage is one of the necessary tasks to
be addressed before the blueprint for cloud computing is accepted.
In the past decades, data storage has been recognized as one of the main
concerns of information technology. The beneﬁts of network-based applications
have led to the transition from server-attached storage to distributed storage.
Based on the fact that data security is the foundation of information security,
a great quantity of efforts has been made in the area of distributed storage
security [13]. However, this research in cloud computing security is still in
its infancy [4].
One consideration is that the unique issues associated with cloud computing
security have not been recognized. Some researchers think that cloud comput-
ing security will not be much different from existing security practices and that
the security aspects can be well-managed using existing techniques such as
digital signatures, encryption, ﬁrewalls, and/or the isolation of virtual environ-
ments, and so on [4]. For example, SSL (Secure Sockets Layer) is a protocol
that provides reliable secure communications on the Internet for things such as
Web browsing, e-mail, instant messaging, and other data transfers.
Cloud Computing: Principles and Paradigms,
Edited by Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg and
Andrzej Goscinski
Copyright r 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
221


Another consideration is that the speciﬁc security requirements for cloud
computing have not been well-deﬁned within the community. Cloud security is
an important area of research. Many consultants and security agencies have
issued warnings on the security threats in the cloud computing model [5].
Besides, potential users still wonder whether the cloud is secure. There are at
least two concerns when using the cloud. One concern is that the users do not
want to reveal their data to the cloud service provider. For example, the data
could be sensitive information like medical records. Another concern is that the
users are unsure about the integrity of the data they receive from the cloud.
Therefore, within the cloud, more than conventional security mechanisms will
be required for data security.
This chapter presents the recent research progress and some results of secure
distributed data storage in cloud computing.
The rest of this chapter is
organized as follows. Section 8.2 indicates the results of the migration from
traditional distributed data storage to the cloud-computing-based data storage
platform. Aside from discussing the advantages of the new technology, we also
illustrate a new vulnerability through analyzing three current commercial cloud
service platforms. Section 8.3 presents technologies for data security in cloud
computing from four different perspectives:
8.3.1 Database Outsourcing and Query Integrity Assurance
8.3.2 Data Integrity in Untrustworthy Storage
8.3.3 Web-Application-Based Security
8.3.4 Multimedia Data Security Storage
Section 8.4 discusses some open questions and existing challenges in this area
and outlines the potential directions for further research. Section 8.5 wraps up
this chapter with a brief summary.
8.2
CLOUD STORAGE: FROM LANs TO WANs
Cloud computing has been viewed as the future of the IT industry. It will be a
revolutionary change in computing services. Users will be allowed to purchase
CPU cycles, memory utilities, and information storage services conveniently
just like how we pay our monthly water and electricity bills. However, this
image will not become realistic until some challenges have been addressed. In
this section, we will brieﬂy introduce the major difference brought by
distributed data storage in cloud computing environment. Then, vulnerabilities
in today’s cloud computing platforms are analyzed and illustrated.
8.2.1
Moving From LANs to WANs
Most designs of distributed storage take the form of either storage area
networks (SANs) or network-attached storage (NAS) on the LAN level, such
222
SECURE DISTRIBUTED DATA STORAGE IN CLOUD COMPUTING


as the networks of an enterprise, a campus, or an organization. SANs are
constructed on top of block-addressed storage units connected through
dedicated high-speed networks. In contrast, NAS is implemented by attaching
specialized ﬁle servers to a TCP/IP network and providing a ﬁle-based interface
to client machine [6]. For SANs and NAS, the distributed storage nodes are
managed by the same authority. The system administrator has control over
each node, and essentially the security level of data is under control. The
reliability of such systems is often achieved by redundancy, and the storage
security is highly dependent on the security of the system against the attacks
and intrusion from outsiders. The conﬁdentiality and integrity of data are
mostly achieved using robust cryptographic schemes.
However, such a security system would not be robust enough to secure
the data in distributed storage applications at the level of wide area net-
works, speciﬁcally in the cloud computing environment. The recent progress
of network technology enables global-scale collaboration over heterogeneous
networks under different authorities. For instance, in a peer-to-peer (P2P)
ﬁle sharing environment, or the distributed storage in a cloud computing
environment, the speciﬁc data storage strategy is transparent to the user [3].
Furthermore, there is no approach to guarantee that the data host nodes are
under robust security protection. In addition, the activity of the medium owner
is not controllable to the data owner. Theoretically speaking, an attacker can
do whatever she wants to the data stored in a storage node once the node is
compromised. Therefore, the conﬁdentiality and the integrity of the data would
be violated when an adversary controls a node or the node administrator
becomes malicious.
8.2.2
Existing Commercial Cloud Services
As shown in Figure 8.1, data storage services on the platform of cloud computing
are fundamentally provided by applications/software based on the Internet.
Although the deﬁnition of cloud computing is not clear yet, several pioneer
commercial implementations have been constructed and opened to the public,
such as Amazon’s Computer Cloud AWS (Amazon Web service) [7], the
Microsoft Azure Service Platform [8], and the Google App Engine (GAE) [9].
In normal network-based applications, user authentication, data conﬁdenti-
ality, and data integrity can be solved through IPSec proxy using encryption
and digital signature. The key exchanging issues can be solved by SSL proxy.
These methods have been applied to today’s cloud computing to secure the
data on the cloud and also secure the communication of data to and from
the cloud. The service providers claim that their services are secure. This section
describes three secure methods used in three commercial cloud services
and discusses their vulnerabilities.
Amazon’s Web Service. Amazon provides Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)
with different terms, such as Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2), SimpleDB, Simple
8.2
CLOUD STORAGE: FROM LANs TO WANs
223
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>


Storage Service (S3), and so on. They are supposed to ensure the conﬁdenti-
ality, integrity, and availability of the customers’ applications and data. Figure
8.2 presents one of the data processing methods adopted in Amazon’s AWS [7],
which is used to transfer large amounts of data between the AWS cloud and
portable storage devices.
Cloud
(Network Fabric) 
Mobile
Laptop
Station
Storage Server Farm
SaaS
PaaS
IaaS
Internet
Cloud
FIGURE 8.1. Illustration of cloud computing principle.
Create a job
Get the manifest file
Sign the manifest file
 Email the manifest file
Ship the device with
signed file 
Verify the manifest file
with received signature 
Operate as the file
demand 
Ship the device,
email the log with MD5
User
Service Provider
In One Session
FIGURE 8.2. AWS data processing procedure.
224
SECURE DISTRIBUTED DATA STORAGE IN CLOUD COMPUTING


When the user wants to upload the data, he/she stores some parameters such
as AccessKeyID, DeviceID, Destination, and so on, into an import metadata
ﬁle called the manifest ﬁle and then signs the manifest ﬁle and e-mails the signed
manifest ﬁle to Amazon. Another metadata ﬁle named the signature ﬁle is used
by AWS to describe the cipher algorithm that is adopted to encrypt the job
ID and the bytes in the manifest ﬁle. The signature ﬁle can uniquely identify
and authenticate the user request. The signature ﬁle is attached with the storage
device, which is shipped to Amazon for efﬁciency. On receiving the stor-
age device and the signature ﬁle, the service provider will validate the signature
in the device with the manifest ﬁle sent through the email. Then, Amazon will
e-mail management information back to the user including the number of bytes
saved, the MD5 of the bytes, the status of the load, and the location on the
Amazon S3 of the AWS ImportExport Log. This log contains details about
the data ﬁles that have been uploaded, including the key names, number of
bytes, and MD5 checksum values.
The downloading process is similar to the uploading process. The user
creates a manifest and signature ﬁle, e-mails the manifest ﬁle, and ships the
storage device attached with signature ﬁle. When Amazon receives these two
ﬁles, it will validate the two ﬁles, copy the data into the storage device, ship it
back, and e-mail to the user with the status including the MD5 checksum of the
data. Amazon claims that the maximum security is obtained via SSL endpoints.
Microsoft Windows Azure. The Windows Azure Platform (Azure) is an
Internet-scale cloud services platform hosted in Microsoft data centers, which
provides an operating system and a set of developer services that can be used
individually or together [8]. The platform also provides scalable storage service.
There are three basic data items: blobs (up to 50 GB), tables, and queues
( ,8k). In the Azure Storage, based on the blob, table, and queue structures,
Microsoft promises to achieve conﬁdentiality of the users’ data. The procedure
shown in Figure 8.3 provides security for data accessing to ensure that the data
will not be lost.
Create a Account
Get the Secret Key
Create Signature
Create
ContentMD5
Cloud Storage
PUT
GET
Data with MD5
FIGURE 8.3. Security data access procedure.
8.2
CLOUD STORAGE: FROM LANs TO WANs
225


To use Windows Azure Storage service, a user needs to create a storage
account, which can be obtained from the Windows Azure portal web interface.
After creating an account, the user will receive a 256-bit secret key. Each time
when the user wants to send the data to or fetch the data from the cloud, the
user has to use his secret key to create a HMAC SHA256 signature for each
individual request for identiﬁcation. Then the user uses his signature
to authenticate request at server. The signature is passed with each request to
authenticate the user requests by verifying the HMAC signature.
The example in Figure 8.4 is a REST request for a PUT/GET block
operation [10]. Content-MD5 checksums can be provided to guard against
network transfer errors and data integrity. The Content-MD5 checksum in the
PUT is the MD5 checksum of the data block in the request. The MD5
checksum is checked on the server. If it does not match, an error is returned.
The content length speciﬁes the size of the data block contents. There is also
an authorization header inside the HTTP request header as shown above in
Figure 8.4.
At the same time, if the Content-MD5 request header was set when the blob
has been uploaded, it will be returned in the response header. Therefore, the
user can check for message content integrity. Additionally, the secure HTTP
connection is used for true data integrity [7].
Google App Engine (GAE). The Google App Engine (GAE) [9] provides a
powerful distributed data storage service that features a query engine and
transactions. An independent third-party auditor, who claims that GAE can be
secure under the SAS70 auditing industry standard, issued Google Apps an
unqualiﬁed SAS70 Type II certiﬁcation. However, from its on-line storage
PUT http://jerry.blob.core.windows.net/movie/mov.avi
?comp=block &blockid=BlockId1 &timeout=30
HTTP/1.1 Content-Length: 2174344
Content-MD5: FJXZLUNMuI/KZ5KDcJPcOA== 
Authorization:SharedKeyjerry:F5a+dUDvef+PfMb4T8Rc2jHcwfK58KecSZY+l2naIao=
x-ms-date: Sun, 13 Sept 2009 22:30:25 GMT
x-ms-version: 2009-04-14
GET http://jerry.blob.core.windows.net/movies/mov.avi
HTTP/1.1
Authorization:SharedKeyjerry:ZF3lJMtkOMi4y/nedSk5Vn74IU6/fRMwiPsL+uYSDjY=
x-ms-date: Sun, 13 Sept 2009 22:40:34 GMT
x-ms-version: 2009-04-14
FIGURE 8.4. Example of a REST request.
226
SECURE DISTRIBUTED DATA STORAGE IN CLOUD COMPUTING


technical document of lower API [9], there are only some functions such as
GET and PUT. There is no content addressing the issues of securing storage
services. The security of data storage is assumed guaranteed using techniques
such as by SSL link, based on our knowledge of security method adopted by
other services.
Figure 8.5 is one of the secure services, called Google Secure Data
Connector (SDC), based on GAE [9]. The SDC constructs an encrypted
connection between the data source and Google Apps. As long as the data
source is in the Google Apps domain to the Google tunnel protocol servers,
when the user wants to get the data, he/she will ﬁrst send an authorized data
requests to Google Apps, which forwards the request to the tunnel server. The
tunnel servers validate the request identity. If the identity is valid, the tunnel
protocol allows the SDC to set up a connection, authenticate, and encrypt the
data that ﬂows across the Internet. At the same time, the SDC uses resource
rules to validate whether a user is authorized to access a speciﬁed resource.
When the request is valid, the SDC performs a network request. The server
validates the signed request, checks the credentials, and returns the data if the
user is authorized.
The SDC and tunnel server are like the proxy to encrypt connectivity
between Google Apps and the internal network. Moreover, for more security,
the SDC uses signed requests to add authentication information to requests
that are made through the SDC. In the signed request, the user has to submit
identiﬁcation information including the owner_id, viewer_id, instance_id,
app_id, public_key, consumer_key, nonce, token, and signature within the
request [9] to ensure the integrity, security, and privacy of the request.
8.2.3
Vulnerabilities in Current Cloud Services
Previous subsections describe three different commercial cloud computing
secure data storage schemes. Storage services that accept a large amount of
data ( .1 TB) normally adopt strategies that help make the shipment more
convenient, just as the Amazon AWS does. In contrast, services that only
Tunnel Servers
Corporate Firewall
Secure Data Connector
Optional Firewall
Google Apps
Internet
WebService, API Server
Encrypted SDC Tunnel
FIGURE 8.5. Illustration of Google SDC working ﬂow.
8.2
CLOUD STORAGE: FROM LANs TO WANs
227


accept a smaller data amount ( #50 GB) allow the data to be uploaded or
downloaded via the Internet, just as the Azure Storage Service does. To provide
data integrity, the Azure Storage Service stores the uploaded data MD5
checksum in the database and returns it to the user when the user wants to
retrieve the data. Amazon AWS computes the data MD5 checksum and e-mails
it to the user for integrity checking. The SDC is based on GAE’s attempt to
strengthen Internet authentication using a signed request. If these services are
grouped together, the following scheme can be derived.
As shown in Figure 8.6, when user_1 stores data in the cloud, she can ship or
send the data to the service provider with MD5_1. If the data are transferred
through the Internet, a signed request could be used to ensure the privacy,
security, and integrity of the data. When the service provider receives the data
and the MD5 checksum, it stores the data with the corresponding checksum
(MD5_1). When the service provider gets a veriﬁed request to retrieve the data
from another user or the original user, it will send/ship the data with a MD5
checksum to the user. On the Azure platform, the original checksum
MD5_1will be sent, in contrast, a re-computed checksum MD5_2 is sent on
Amazon’s AWS.
The procedure is secure for each individual session. The integrity of the data
during the transmission can be guaranteed by the SSL protocol applied.
However, from the perspective of cloud storage services, data integrity depends
on the security of operations while in storage in addition to the security of the
uploading and downloading sessions. The uploading session can only ensure
that the data received by the cloud storage is the data that the user uploaded;
the downloading session can guarantee the data that the user retrieved is the
data cloud storage recorded. Unfortunately, this procedure applied on cloud
storage services cannot guarantee data integrity.
To illustrate this, let’s consider the following two scenarios. First, assume
that Alice, a company CFO, stores the company ﬁnancial data at a cloud
storage service provided by Eve. And then Bob, the company administration
chairman, downloads the data from the cloud. There are three important
concerns in this simple procedure:
Cloud Service
USER1
USER2
MD5_1
MD5_1/2
FIGURE 8.6. Illustration of potential integrity problem.
228
SECURE DISTRIBUTED DATA STORAGE IN CLOUD COMPUTING


1. Conﬁdentiality. Eve is considered as an untrustworthy third party, Alice
and Bob do not want reveal the data to Eve.
2. Integrity. As the administrator of the storage service, Eve has the
capability to play with the data in hand. How can Bob be conﬁdent
that the data he fetched from Eve are the same as what was sent by Alice?
Are there any measures to guarantee that the data have not been
tampered by Eve?
3. Repudiation. If Bob ﬁnds that the data have been tampered with, is there
any evidence for him to demonstrate that it is Eve who should be
responsible for the fault? Similarly, Eve also needs certain evidence to
prove her innocence.
Recently, a potential customer asked a question on a cloud mailing-group
regarding data integrity and service reliability. The reply from the developer
was “We won’t lose your data—we have a robust backup and recovery strategy —
but we’re not responsible for you losing your own data . . . ” [11]. Obviously, it is
not persuasive to the potential customer to be conﬁdent with the service.
The repudiation issue opens a door for potentially blackmailers when the
user is malicious. Let’s assume that Alice wants to blackmail Eve. Eve is a cloud
storage service provider who claims that data integrity is one of their key
features. For that purpose, Alice stored some data in the cloud, and later she
downloaded the data. Then, she reported that her data were incorrect and that
it is the fault of the storage provider. Alice claims compensation for her so-
called loss. How can the service provider demonstrate her innocence?
Conﬁdentiality can be achieved by adopting robust encryption schemes.
However, the integrity and repudiation issues are not handled well on the
current cloud service platform. One-way SSL session only guarantees one-way
integrity. One critical link is missing between the uploading and downloading
sessions: There is no mechanism for the user or service provider to check
whether the record has been modiﬁed in the cloud storage. This vulnerability
leads to the following questions:
 Upload-to-Download Integrity. Since the integrity in uploading and down-
loading phase are handled separately, how can the user or provider know
the data retrieved from the cloud is the same data that the user uploaded
previously?
 Repudiation Between Users and Service Providers. When data errors
happen without transmission errors in the uploading and downloading
sessions, how can the user and service provider prove their innocence?
8.2.4
Bridge the Missing Link
This section presents several simple ideas to bridge the missing link based on
digital signatures and authentication coding schemes. According to whether
8.2
CLOUD STORAGE: FROM LANs TO WANs
229


there is a third authority certiﬁed (TAC) by the user and provider and whether
the user and provider are using the secret key sharing technique (SKS), there
are four solutions to bridge the missing link of data integrity between
the uploading and downloading procedures. Actually, other digital signature
technologies can be adopted to ﬁx this vulnerability with different approaches.
Neither TAC nor SKS.
Uploading Session
1. User: Sends data to service provider with MD5 checksum and MD5
Signature by User (MSU).
2. Service Provider: Veriﬁes the data with MD5 checksum, if it is valid, the
service provider sends back the MD5 and MD5 Signature by Provider
(MSP) to user.
3. MSU is stored at the user side, and MSP is stored at the service provider
side.
Once the uploading operation ﬁnished, both sides agreed on the integrity of the
uploaded data, and each side owns the MD5 checksum and MD5 signature
generated by the opposite site.
Downloading Session
1. User: Sends request to service provider with authentication code.
2. Service Provider: Veriﬁes the request identity, if it is valid, the service
provider sends back the data with MD5 checksum and MD5 Signature by
Provider (MSP) to user.
3. User veriﬁes the data using the MD5 checksum.
When disputation happens, the user or the service provider can check the
MD5 checksum and the signature of MD5 checksum generated by the opposite
side to prove its innocence. However, there are some special cases that exist.
When the service provider is trustworthy, only MSU is needed; when the user is
trustworthy, only MSP is needed; if each of them trusts the other side, neither
MSU nor MSP is needed. Actually, that is the current method adopted in cloud
computing platforms. Essentially, this approach implies that when the identity
is authenticated that trust is established.
With SKS but without TAC.
Uploading Session
1. User: Sends data to service provider with MD checksum 5.
2. Service Provider: Veriﬁes the data with MD5 checksum, if it is valid, the
service provider sends back the MD5 checksum.
3. The service provider and the user share the MD5 checksum with SKS.
230
SECURE DISTRIBUTED DATA STORAGE IN CLOUD COMPUTING


Then, both sides agree on the integrity of the uploaded data, and they share the
agreed MD5 checksum, which is used when disputation happens.
Downloading Session
1. User: Sends request to the service provider with authentication code.
2. Service Provider: Veriﬁes the request identity, if it is valid, the service
provider sends back the data with MD5 checksum.
3. User veriﬁes the data through the MD5 checksum.
When disputation happens, the user or the service provider can take the
shared MD5 together, recover it, and prove his/her innocence.
With TAC but without SKS.
Uploading Session
1. User: Sends data to the service provider along with MD5 checksum and
MD5 Signature by User (MSU).
2. Service Provider: Veriﬁes the data with MD5 checksum, if it is valid, the
service provider sends back the MD5 checksum and MD5 Signature by
Provider (MSP) to the user.
3. MSU and MSP are sent to TAC.
On ﬁnishing the uploading phase, both sides agree on the integrity of the
uploaded data, and TAC owns their agreed MD5 signature.
Downloading Session
1. User: Sends request to the service provider with authentication code.
2. Service Provider: Veriﬁes the request with identity, if it is valid, the service
provider sends back the data with MD5 checksum.
3. User veriﬁes the data through the MD5 checksum.
When disputation happens, the user or the service provider can prove his
innocence by presenting the MSU and MSP stored at the TAC.
Similarly, there are some special cases. When the service provider is
trustworthy, only the MSU is needed; when the user is trustworthy, only the
MSP is needed; if each of them trusts the other, the TAC is not needed. Again,
the last case is the method adopted in the current cloud computing platforms.
When the identity is authenticated, trust is established.
With Both TAC and SKS.
Uploading Session
1. User: Sends data to the service provider with MD5 checksum.
2. Service Provider: veriﬁes the data with MD5 checksum.
8.2
CLOUD STORAGE: FROM LANs TO WANs
231


3. Both the user and the service provider send MD5 checksum to TAC.
4. TAC veriﬁes the two MD5 checksum values. If they match, the TAC
distributes MD5 to the user and the service provider by SKS.
Both sides agree on the integrity of the uploaded data and share the same MD5
checksum by SKS, and the TAC own their agreed MD5 signatures.
Downloading Session
1. User: Sends request to the service provider with authentication code.
2. Service Provider: Veriﬁes the request identity, if it is valid, the service
provider sends back the data with MD5 checksum.
3. User veriﬁes the data through the MD5 checksum.
When disputation happens, the user or the service provider can prove their
innocence by checking the shared MD5 checksum together. If the disputation
cannot be resolved, they can seek further help from the TAC for the MD5
checksum.
Here are the special cases. When the service provider is trustworthy, only the
user needs the MD5 checksum; when the user is trustworthy, only the service
provider needs MD5 checksum; if both of them can be trusted, the TAC is not
needed. This is the method used in the current cloud computing platform.
8.3
TECHNOLOGIES FOR DATA SECURITY IN CLOUD COMPUTING
This section presents several technologies for data security and privacy in cloud
computing. Focusing on the unique issues of the cloud data storage platform,
this section does not repeat the normal approaches that provide conﬁdentiality,
integrity, and availability in distributed data storage applications. Instead, we
select to illustrate the unique requirements for cloud computing data security
from a few different perspectives:
 Database Outsourcing and Query Integrity Assurance. Researchers have
pointed out that storing data into and fetching data from devices
and machines behind a cloud are essentially a novel form of database
outsourcing. Section 8.3.1 introduces the technologies of Database Out-
sourcing and Query Integrity Assurance on the clouding computing
platform.
 Data Integrity in Untrustworthy Storage. One of the main challenges that
prevent end users from adopting cloud storage services is the fear of
losing data or data corruption. It is critical to relieve the users’ fear by
providing technologies that enable users to check the integrity of their
data. Section 8.3.2 presents two approaches that allow users to detect
whether the data has been touched by unauthorized people.
232
SECURE DISTRIBUTED DATA STORAGE IN CLOUD COMPUTING


 Web-Application-Based Security. Once the dataset is stored remotely, a
Web browser is one of the most convenient approaches that end users can
use to access their data on remote services. In the era of cloud computing,
Web security plays a more important role than ever. Section 8.3.3
discusses the most important concerns in Web security and analyzes a
couple of widely used attacks.
 Multimedia Data Security. With the development of high-speed network
technologies and large bandwidth connections, more and more multi-
media data are being stored and shared in cyber space. The security
requirements for video, audio, pictures, or images are different from other
applications. Section 8.3.4 introduces the requirements for multimedia
data security in the cloud.
8.3.1
Database Outsourcing and Query Integrity Assurance
In recent years, database outsourcing has become an important component of
cloud computing. Due to the rapid advancements in network technology, the
cost of transmitting a terabyte of data over long distances has decreased
signiﬁcantly in the past decade. In addition, the total cost of data management
is ﬁve to ten times higher than the initial acquisition costs. As a result, there is a
growing interest in outsourcing database management tasks to third parties that
can provide these tasks for a much lower cost due to the economy of scale. This
new outsourcing model has the beneﬁts of reducing the costs for running
Database Management Systems (DBMS) independently and enabling enter-
prises to concentrate on their main businesses [12]. Figure 8.7 demonstrates the
general architecture of a database outsourcing environment with clients.
The database owner outsources its data management tasks, and clients send
queries to the untrusted service provider. Let T denote the data to be outsourced.
The data T are is preprocessed, encrypted, and stored at the service provider. For
evaluating queries, a user rewrites a set of queries Q against T to queries against
the encrypted database.
The outsourcing of databases to a third-party service provider was ﬁrst
introduced by Hacigu¨ mu¨ s et al. [13]. Generally, there are two security concerns
queryRewrite(Q)
Query Results
Service Provider
DB
dataTransform(T)
Database Owner
Clients
FIGURE 8.7. The system architecture of database outsourcing.
8.3
TECHNOLOGIES FOR DATA SECURITY IN CLOUD COMPUTING
233


in database outsourcing. These are data privacy and query integrity. The
related research is outlined below.
Data Privacy Protection. Hacigu¨ mu¨ s et al. [37] proposed a method to execute
SQL queries over encrypted databases. Their strategy is to process as much of a
query as possible by the service providers, without having to decrypt the data.
Decryption and the remainder of the query processing are performed at the client
side. Agrawal et al. [14] proposed an order-preserving encryption scheme for
numeric values that allows any comparison operation to be directly applied on
encrypted data. Their technique is able to handle updates, and new values can be
added without requiring changes in the encryption of other values. Generally,
existing methods enable direct execution of encrypted queries on encrypted
datasets and allow users to ask identity queries over data of different encryptions.
The ultimate goal of this research direction is to make queries in encrypted
databases as efﬁcient as possible while preventing adversaries from learning any
useful knowledge about the data. However, researches in this ﬁeld did not
consider the problem of query integrity.
Query Integrity Assurance. In addition to data privacy, an important
security concern in the database outsourcing paradigm is query integrity.
Query integrity examines the trustworthiness of the hosting environment.
When a client receives a query result from the service provider, it wants to be
assured that the result is both correct and complete, where correct means that
the result must originate in the owner’s data and not has been tampered with,
and complete means that the result includes all records satisfying the query.
Devanbu et al. [15] authenticate data records using the Merkle hash tree [16],
which is based on the idea of using a signature on the root of the Merkle hash
tree to generate a proof of correctness. Mykletun et al. [17] studied and
compared several signature methods that can be utilized in data authentication,
and they identiﬁed the problem of completeness but did not provide a solution.
Pang et al. [18] utilized an aggregated signature to sign each record with the
information from neighboring records by assuming that all the records are
sorted with a certain order. The method ensures the completeness of a selection
query by checking the aggregated signature. But it has difﬁculties in handling
multipoint selection query of which the result tuples occupy a noncontinuous
region of the ordered sequence.
The work in Li et al. [19] utilizes Merkle hash tree-based methods to audit
the completeness of query results, but since the Merkle hash tree also applies the
signature of the root Merkle tree node, a similar difﬁculty exists. Besides,
the network and CPU overhead on the client side can be prohibitively high for
some types of queries. In some extreme cases, the overhead could be as high as
processing these queries locally, which can undermine the beneﬁts of database
outsourcing. Sion [20] proposed a mechanism called the challenge token and
uses it as a probabilistic proof that the server has executed the query over the
entire database. It can handle arbitrary types of queries including joins and
234
SECURE DISTRIBUTED DATA STORAGE IN CLOUD COMPUTING


does not assume that the underlying data is ordered. However, the approach is
not applied to the adversary model where an adversary can ﬁrst compute
the complete query result and then delete the tuples speciﬁcally corresponding
to the challenge tokens [21]. Besides, all the aforementioned methods must
modify the DBMS kernel in order to provide proof of integrity.
Recently, Wang et al. [22] proposed a solution named dual encryption to ensure
query integrity without requiring the database engine to perform any special
function beyond query processing. Dual encryption enables cross-examination of
the outsourced data, which consist of (a) the original data stored under a certain
encryption scheme and (b) another small percentage of the original data stored
under a different encryption scheme. Users generate queries against the additional
piece of data and analyze their results to obtain integrity assurance.
For auditing spatial queries, Yang et al [23] proposed the MR-tree, which is
an authenticated data structure suitable for verifying queries executed on
outsourced spatial databases. The authors also designed a caching technique
to reduce the information sent to the client for veriﬁcation purposes. Four
spatial transformation mechanisms are presented in Yiu et al. [24] for protect-
ing the privacy of outsourced private spatial data. The data owner selects
transformation keys that are shared with trusted clients, and it is infeasible
to reconstruct the exact original data points from the transformed points
without the key. However, both aforementioned researches did not consider
data privacy protection and query integrity auditing jointly in their design. The
state-of-the-art technique that can ensure both privacy and integrity for
outsourced spatial data is proposed in Ku et al. [12]. In particular, the solution
ﬁrst employs a one-way spatial transformation method based on Hilbert
curves, which encrypts the spatial data before outsourcing and hence ensures
its privacy. Next, by probabilistically replicating a portion of the data and
encrypting it with a different encryption key, the authors devise a mechanism
for the client to audit the trustworthiness of the query results.
8.3.2
Data Integrity in Untrustworthy Storage
While the transparent cloud provides ﬂexible utility of network-based
resources, the fear of loss of control on their data is one of the major concerns
that prevent end users from migrating to cloud storage services. Actually it is a
potential risk that the storage infrastructure providers become self-interested,
untrustworthy, or even malicious. There are different motivations whereby a
storage service provider could become untrustworthy—for instance, to cover
the consequence of a mistake in operation, or deny the vulnerability in the
system after the data have been stolen by an adversary. This section introduces
two technologies to enable data owners to verify the data integrity while the
ﬁles are stored in the remote untrustworthy storage services.
Actually, before the term “cloud computing” appears as an IT term, there
are several remote data storage checking protocols that have been suggested
[25], [26]. Later research has summarized that in practice a remote data
8.3
TECHNOLOGIES FOR DATA SECURITY IN CLOUD COMPUTING
235


possession checking protocol has to satisfy the following ﬁve requirements [27].
Note that the veriﬁer could be either the data owner or a trusted third party,
and the prover could be the storage service provider or storage medium owner
or system administrator.
 Requirement #1. It should not be a pre-requirement that the veriﬁer has to
possess a complete copy of the data to be checked. And in practice, it does
not make sense for a veriﬁer to keep a duplicated copy of the content to be
veriﬁed. As long as it serves the purpose well, storing a more concise
contents digest of the data at the veriﬁer should be enough.
 Requirement #2. The protocol has to be very robust considering the
untrustworthy prover. A malicious prover is motivated to hide the viola-
tion of data integrity. The protocol should be robust enough that such a
prover ought to fail in convincing the veriﬁer.
 Requirement #3. The amount of information exchanged during the
veriﬁcation operation should not lead to high communication overhead.
 Requirement #4. The protocol should be computationally efﬁcient.
 Requirement #5. It ought to be possible to run the veriﬁcation an
unlimited number of times.
A PDP-Based Integrity Checking Protocol. Ateniese et al. [28] proposed a
protocol based on the provable data procession (PDP) technology, which allows
users to obtain a probabilistic proof from the storage service providers. Such a
proof will be used as evidence that their data have been stored there. One of the
advantages of this protocol is that the proof could be generated by the storage
service provider by accessing only a small portion of the whole dataset. At the
same time, the amount of the metadata that end users are required to store is
also small—that is, O(1). Additionally, such a small amount data exchanging
procedure lowers the overhead in the communication channels too.
Figure 8.8 presents the ﬂowcharts of the protocol for provable data
possession [28]. The data owner, the client in the ﬁgure, executes the protocol
to verify that a dataset is stored in an outsourced storage machine as a collec-
tion of n blocks. Before uploading the data into the remote storage, the data
owner pre-processes the dataset and a piece of metadata is generated. The
metadata are stored at the data owner’s side, and the dataset will be transmitted
to the storage server. The cloud storage service stores the dataset and sends the
data to the user in responding to queries from the data owner in the future.
As part of pre-processing procedure, the data owner (client) may conduct
operations on the data such as expanding the data or generating additional
metadata to be stored at the cloud server side. The data owner could execute
the PDP protocol before the local copy is deleted to ensure that the uploaded
copy has been stored at the server machines successfully. Actually, the data
owner may encrypt a dataset before transferring them to the storage machines.
During the time that data are stored in the cloud, the data owner can generate a
236
SECURE DISTRIBUTED DATA STORAGE IN CLOUD COMPUTING


“challenge” and send it to the service provider to ensure that the storage server
has stored the dataset. The data owner requests that the storage server generate
a metadata based on the stored data and then send it back. Using the previously
stored local metadata, the owner veriﬁes the response.
On the behalf of the cloud service provider’s side, the server may receive
multiple challenges from different users at the same time. For the sake
of availability, it is highly desired to minimize not only the computational
Client generates
metadata (m) and
modified file (F)
Client store
Server store
Client store
Server store
Client
Server
Client
Server
m
m
m
F
F
P
F
F
No server
processing
(1) Client generates a
random challenge R
(a) Pre-process and store
(b) Verify server possession
R
(2) Server computes
proof of possession P
(3) Client verifies
server’s proof
0/1
Input file
m
F
FIGURE 8.8. Protocol for provable data possession [28].
8.3
TECHNOLOGIES FOR DATA SECURITY IN CLOUD COMPUTING
237


overhead of each individual calculation, but also the number of data blocks to
be accessed. In addition, considering the pressure on the communication
networks, minimal bandwidth consumption also implies that there are a limited
amount of metadata included in the response generated by the server. In the
protocol shown in Figure 8.8, the PDP scheme only randomly accesses one
subdata block when the sample the stored dataset [28]. Hence, the PDP scheme
probabilistically guarantees the data integrity. It is mandatory to access the
whole dataset if a deterministic guarantee is required by the user.
An Enhanced Data Possession Checking Protocol. Sebe et al. [27]
pointed out that the above PDP-based protocol does not satisfy Requirement
#2 with 100% probability. An enhanced protocol has been proposed based on
the idea of the DifﬁeHellman scheme. It is claimed that this protocol satisﬁes
all ﬁve requirements and is computationally more efﬁcient than the PDP-based
protocol [27]. The veriﬁcation time has been shortened at the setup stage by
taking advantage of the trade-offs between the computation times required
by the prover and the storage required at the veriﬁer. The setup stage sets the
following parameters:
p and q : two primary factors chosen by the veriﬁer;
N 5 pq: a public RSA modulus created by the veriﬁer;
Φ(N) 5 (p 2 1)(q 2 1): the private key of the veriﬁer, which is the secret only
known by the veriﬁer;
l: an integer that is chosen depending on the trade-offs between the
computation time required at the prover and the storage required at
the veriﬁer;
t: a security parameter;
PRNG: a pseudorandom number generator, which generates t-bit integer
values.
The protocol is presented as follows:
At ﬁrst, the veriﬁer generates the digest of data m:
1. Break the data m into n pieces, each is l-bit. Let m1, m2, . . . , mn
(n ¼ djmj=le) be the integer values corresponding to fragments of m.
2. For each fragment mi, compute and store Mi 5 mi mod Φ(N).
The challengeresponse veriﬁcation protocol is as follows:
1. The veriﬁer
1.1
generates a random seed S and a random element α A ZN \{1, N1}
and
1.2
sends the challenge (α, S) to the prover.
238
SECURE DISTRIBUTED DATA STORAGE IN CLOUD COMPUTING


2. Upon receiving the challenge, the prover:
2.1
generates n pseudorandom values ci A [1,2t], for i 5 1 to n, using
PRNG seeded by S,
2.2
calculates r ¼ Pn
i¼1 cimi and R 5 αr mod N, and
2.3
sends R to the veriﬁer.
3. The veriﬁer:
3.1
regenerates the n pseudorandom values ci A [1,2t], for i 5 1 to n,
using PRNG seeded by S,
3.2
calculates r0 ¼ Pn
i¼1 cimi mod Φ(N) and R ’ 5 αr’ mod N, and
3.3
checks whether R 5 R’.
Due to the space constraints, this section only introduces the basic princi-
ples and the working ﬂows of the protocols for data integrity checking in
untrustworthy storages. The proof of the correctness, security analysis, and the
performance analysis of the protocols are left for the interested readers to
explore deeper in the cited research papers [25, 2628].
8.3.3
Web-Application-Based Security
In cloud computing environments, resources are provided as a service over the
Internet in a dynamic, virtualized, and scalable way [29, 30]. Through cloud
computing services, users access business applications on-line from a Web
browser, while the software and data are stored on the servers. Therefore, in the
era of cloud computing, Web security plays a more important role than ever.
The Web site server is the ﬁrst gate that guards the vast cloud resources. Since
the cloud may operate continuously to process millions of dollars’ worth of
daily on-line transactions, the impact of any Web security vulnerability will be
ampliﬁed at the level of the whole cloud.
Web attack techniques are often referred as the class of attack. When any
Web security vulnerability is identiﬁed, attacker will employ those techniques
to take advantage of the security vulnerability. The types of attack can be
categorized in Authentication, Authorization, Client-Side Attacks, Comm-
and Execution, Information Disclosure, and Logical Attacks [31]. Due to the
limited space, this section introduces each of them brieﬂy. Interested read-
ers are encouraged to explore for more detailed information from the
materials cited.
Authentication. Authentication is the process of verifying a claim that a
subject made to act on behalf of a given principal. Authentication attacks target
a Web site’s method of validating the identity of a user, service, or application,
including Brute Force, Insufﬁcient Authentication, and Weak Password
Recovery Validation. Brute Force attack employs an automated process to
guess a person’s username and password by trial and error. In the Insufﬁcient
Authentication case, some sensitive content or functionality are protected by
8.3
TECHNOLOGIES FOR DATA SECURITY IN CLOUD COMPUTING
239


“hiding” the speciﬁc location in obscure string but still remains accessible
directly through a speciﬁc URL. The attacker could discover those URLs
through a Brute Force probing of ﬁles and directories. Many Web sites provide
password recovery service. This service will automatically recover the user
name or password to the user if she or he can answer some questions deﬁned as
part of the user registration process. If the recovery questions are either easily
guessed or can be skipped, this Web site is considered to be Weak Password
Recovery Validation.
Authorization. Authorization is used to verify if an authenticated subject
can perform a certain operation. Authentication must precede authorization.
For example, only certain users are allowed to access speciﬁc content or
functionality.
Authorization attacks use various techniques to gain access to protected
areas beyond their privileges. One typical authorization attack is caused by
Insufﬁcient Authorization. When a user is authenticated to a Web site, it does
not necessarily mean that she should have access to certain content that
has been granted arbitrarily. Insufﬁcient authorization occurs when a Web
site does not protect sensitive content or functionality with proper access
control restrictions. Other authorization attacks are involved with session.
Those attacks include Credential/Session Prediction, Insufﬁcient Session
Expiration, and Session Fixation.
In many Web sites, after a user successfully authenticates with the Web site
for the ﬁrst time, the Web site creates a session and generate a unique “session
ID” to identify this session. This session ID is attached to subsequent requests
to the Web site as “Proof” of the authenticated session.
Credential/Session Prediction attack deduces or guesses the unique value of
a session to hijack or impersonate a user.
Insufﬁcient Session Expiration occurs when an attacker is allowed to reuse
old session credentials or session IDs for authorization. For example, in a
shared computer, after a user accesses a Web site and then leaves, with
Insufﬁcient Session Expiration, an attacker can use the browser’s back button
to access Web pages previously accessed by the victim.
Session Fixation forces a user’s session ID to an arbitrary value via Cross-
Site Scripting or peppering the Web site with previously made HTTP requests.
Once the victim logs in, the attacker uses the predeﬁned session ID value to
impersonate the victim’s identity.
Client-Side Attacks. The Client-Side Attacks lure victims to click a link in a
malicious Web page and then leverage the trust relationship expectations of the
victim for the real Web site. In Content Spooﬁng, the malicious Web page can
trick a user into typing user name and password and will then use this
information to impersonate the user.
Cross-Site Scripting (XSS) launches attacker-supplied executable code in the
victim’s browser. The code is usually written in browser-supported scripting
240
SECURE DISTRIBUTED DATA STORAGE IN CLOUD COMPUTING


languages such as JavaScript, VBScript, ActiveX, Java, or Flash. Since the code
will run within the security context of the hosting Web site, the code has the
ability to read, modify, and transmit any sensitive data, such as cookies,
accessible by the browser.
Cross-Site Request Forgery (CSRF) is a serve security attack to a vulnerable
site that does not take the checking of CSRF for the HTTP/HTTPS request.
Assuming that the attacker knows the URLs of the vulnerable site which are
not protected by CSRF checking and the victim’s browser stores credentials
such as cookies of the vulnerable site, after luring the victim to click a link in a
malicious Web page, the attacker can forge the victim’s identity and access the
vulnerable Web site on victim’s behalf.
Command Execution. The Command Execution attacks exploit server-side
vulnerabilities to execute remote commands on the Web site. Usually, users
supply inputs to the Web-site to request services. If a Web application does not
properly sanitize user-supplied input before using it within application code, an
attacker could alter command execution on the server. For example, if the
length of input is not checked before use, buffer overﬂow could happen and
result in denial of service. Or if the Web application uses user input to construct
statements such as SQL, XPath, C/C11 Format String, OS system command,
LDAP, or dynamic HTML, an attacker may inject arbitrary executable code
into the server if the user input is not properly ﬁltered.
Information Disclosure. The Information Disclosure attacks acquire sensi-
tive information about a web site revealed by developer comments, error
messages, or well-know ﬁle name conventions. For example, a Web server may
return a list of ﬁles within a requested directory if the default ﬁle is not present.
This will supply an attacker with necessary information to launch further
attacks against the system. Other types of Information Disclosure includes
using special paths such as “.” and “..” for Path Traversal, or uncovering
hidden URLs via Predictable Resource Location.
Logical Attacks. Logical Attacks involve the exploitation of a Web applica-
tion’s logic ﬂow. Usually, a user’s action is completed in a multi-step process.
The procedural workﬂow of the process is called application logic. A common
Logical Attack is Denial of Service (DoS). DoS attacks will attempt to consume
all available resources in the Web server such as CPU, memory, disk space, and
so on, by abusing the functionality provided by the Web site. When any one of
any system resource reaches some utilization threshold, the Web site will
no long be responsive to normal users. DoS attacks are often caused by
Insufﬁcient Anti-automation where an attacker is permitted to automate a
process repeatedly. An automated script could be executed thousands of times
a minute, causing potential loss of performance or service.
8.3
TECHNOLOGIES FOR DATA SECURITY IN CLOUD COMPUTING
241


8.3.4
Multimedia Data Security Storage
With the rapid developments of multimedia technologies, more and more
multimedia contents are being stored and delivered over many kinds of devices,
databases, and networks. Multimedia Data Security plays an important role in
the data storage to protect multimedia data. Recently, how storage multimedia
contents are delivered by both different providers and users has attracted much
attentions and many applications. This section brieﬂy goes through the most
critical topics in this area.
Protection from Unauthorized Replication. Contents replication is requi-
red to generate and keep multiple copies of certain multimedia contents. For
example, content distribution networks (CDNs) have been used to manage
content distribution to large numbers of users, by keeping the replicas of the
same contents on a group of geographically distributed surrogates [32, 33].
Although the replication can improve the system performance, the unauthor-
ized replication causes some problems such as contents copyright, waste of
replication cost, and extra control overheads.
Protection from Unauthorized Replacement. As the storage capacity is
limited, a replacement process must be carried out when the capacity exceeds its
limit. It means the situation that a currently stored content [34] must be
removed from the storage space in order to make space for the new coming
content. However, how to decide which content should be removed is very
important. If an unauthorized replacement happens, the content which the user
doesn’t want to delete will be removed resulting in an accident of the data loss.
Furthermore, if the important content such as system data is removed by
unauthorized replacement, the result will be more serious.
Protection from Unauthorized Pre-fetching. The Pre-fetching is widely
deployed in Multimedia Storage Network Systems between server databases
and end users’ storage disks [35]. That is to say, If a content can be predicted to
be requested by the user in future requests, this content will be fetched from the
server database to the end user before this user requests it, in order to decrease
user response time. Although the Pre-fetching shows its efﬁciency, the un-
authorized pre-fetching should be avoided to make the system to fetch the
necessary content.
8.4
OPEN QUESTIONS AND CHALLENGES
Almost all the current commercial cloud service providers claim that their
platforms are secure and robust. On one hand, they adopt robust cipher
algorithms for conﬁdentiality of stored data; on the other hand, they depend on
network communication security protocols such as SSL, IPSec, or others to
242
SECURE DISTRIBUTED DATA STORAGE IN CLOUD COMPUTING


protect data in transmission in the network. For the service availability and
high performance, they choose virtualization technologies and apply strong
authentication and authorization schemes in their cloud domains. However, as
a new infrastructure/platform leading to new application/service models of
the future’s IT industry, the requirement for a security cloud computing is
different from the traditional security problems. As pointed out by Dr. K. M.
Khan [4]:
Encryption, digital signatures, network security, ﬁrewalls, and the isolation of
virtual environments all are important for cloud computing security, but these
alone won’t make cloud computing reliable for consumers.
8.4.1
Concerns at Different Levels
The cloud computing environment consists of three levels of abstractions [4]:
1. The cloud infrastructure providers, which is at the back end, own and
manage the network infrastructure and resources including hardware
devices and system software.
2. The cloud service providers, which offer services such as on-demand
computing, utility computing, data processing, software services, and
platforms for developing application software.
3. The cloud consumers, which is at the front end of the cloud computing
environment and consists of two major categories of users: (a) application
developers, who take advantage of the hardware infrastructure and the
software platforms to construct application software for ultimate end
users; and (b) end users, who carry out their daily works using the on-
demand computing, software services, and utility services.
Regarding data/information security, the users at different levels have
variant expectations and concerns due to the roles they play in the data’s life
cycle.
From the perspective of cloud consumers, normally who are the data
owners, the concerns are essentially raised from the loss of control when
the data are in a cloud. As the dataset is stored in unknown third-party
infrastructure, the owner loses not only the advantages of endpoint restrictions
and management, but also the ﬁne-grained credential quality control. The
uncertainty about the privacy and the doubt about the vulnerability are also
resulted from the disappearing physical and logical network boundaries [36].
The main security concerns of the end users include conﬁdentiality, loss of
control of data, and the undisclosed security proﬁles of the cloud service and
infrastructure providers. The users’ data are transmitted between the local
machine and cloud service provider for variant operations, and they are also
persistently stored in the cloud infrastructure provider’s facilities. During this
8.4
OPEN QUESTIONS AND CHALLENGES
243


procedure, data might not be adequately protected while they are being moved
within the systems or across multiple sites owned by these providers. The data
owner also cannot check the security assurances before using the service from
the cloud, because the actual security capabilities associated with the providers
are transparent to the user/owner.
The problem becomes more complicated when the service and infrastructure
providers are not the same, and this implies additional communication links in
the chain. Involving a third party in the services also introduces an additional
vector of attack. Actually, in practice there are more challenging scenarios.
For instance, consider that multiple end users have different sets of security
requirements while using the same service offered by an individual cloud service
provider. To handle such kind of complexity, one single set of security
provisions does not ﬁt all in cloud computing. The scenarios also imply
that the back-end infrastructure and/or service providers must be capable of
supporting multiple levels requirements of security similar to those guaranteed
by front-end service provider.
From the perspective of the cloud service providers, the main concern with
regard to protecting users’ data is the transfer of data from devices and servers
within the control of the users to its own devices and subsequently to those of
the cloud infrastructure, where the data is stored. The data are stored in cloud
service provider’s devices on multiple machines across the entire virtual layer.
The data are also hosted on devices that belong to infrastructure provider. The
cloud service provider needs to ensure users that the security of their data is
being adequately addressed between the partners, that their virtual environ-
ments are isolated with sufﬁcient protection, and that the cleanup of outdated
images is being suitably managed at its site and cloud infrastructure provider’s
storage machines.
Undoubtedly, the cloud infrastructure providers’ security concerns are not
less than those of end users or cloud service providers. The infrastructure
provider knows that a single point of failure in its infrastructure security
mechanisms would allow hackers to take out thousands of data bytes owned by
the clients, and most likely data owned by other enterprises. The cloud
infrastructure providers need to ask the following questions:
 How are the data stored in its physical devices protected?
 How does the cloud infrastructure manage the backup of data, and the
destruction of outdated data, at its site?
 How can the cloud infrastructure control access to its physical devices and
the images stored on those devices?
8.4.2
Technical and Nontechnical Challenges
The above analysis has shown that besides technical challenges, the cloud
computing platform (infrastructure and service) providers are also required to
244
SECURE DISTRIBUTED DATA STORAGE IN CLOUD COMPUTING


meet a couple of nontechnical issues—for example, the lack of legal require-
ments on data security to service providers [36]. More speciﬁcally, the following
technical challenges need to be addressed in order to make cloud computing
acceptable for common consumers:
 Open security proﬁling of services that is available to end users and
veriﬁable automatically. Service providers need to disclose in detail the
levels of speciﬁc security properties rather than providing blanket assur-
ances of “secure” services.
 The cloud service/infrastructure providers are required to enable end users
to remotely control their virtual working platforms in the cloud and
monitor others’ access to their data. This includes the capability of ﬁne-
grained accessing controls on their own data, no matter where the data
ﬁles are stored and processed. In addition, it is ideal to possess the
capability of restricting any unauthorized third parties from manipulating
users’ data, including the cloud service provider, as well as cloud
infrastructure providers.
 Security compliance with existing standards could be useful to enhance
cloud security. There must be consistency between the security require-
ments and/or policies of service consumers and the security assurances of
cloud providers [4].
 It is mandatory for the providers to ensure that software is as secure as
they claim. These assurances may include certiﬁcation of the security of
the systems in question. A certiﬁcate—issued after rigorous testing
according to agreed criteria (e.g., ISO/IEC 15408)—can ensure the degree
of reliability of software in different conﬁgurations and environments as
claimed by the cloud providers.
Regarding the above technical issues, actually they have been and will be
addressed by constant development of new technologies. However, some
special efforts are needed to meet the nontechnical challenges. For instance,
one of the most difﬁcult issue to be solved in cloud computing is the users’ fear
of losing control over their data. Because end users feel that they do not clearly
know where and how their data are handled, or when the users realize that
their data are processed, transmitted, and stored by devices under the control
of some strangers, it is reasonable for them to be concerned about things
happening in the cloud. In traditional work environments, in order to keep a
dataset secure, the operator just keeps it away from the threat. In cloud
computing, however, it seems that datasets are moved closer to their threats;
that is, they are transmitted to, stored in, and manipulated by remote devices
controlled by third parties, not by the owner of the data set. It is recognized
that this is partly a psychological issue; but until end users have enough
information and insight that make them believe cloud computing security and
its dynamics, the fear is unlikely to go away.
8.4
OPEN QUESTIONS AND CHALLENGES
245


End-user license agreements (EULAs) and vendor privacy policies are not
enough to solve this psychological issue. Service-level agreements (SLAs) need to
specify the preferred security assurances of consumers in detail. Proper business
models and risk assessments related to cloud computing security need to be
deﬁned. Inthis new security-sensitive design paradigm, the ability to change one’s
mind is crucial, because consumers are more security-aware than ever before.
They not only make the service-consuming decision on cost and service, they also
want to see real, credible security measures from cloud providers.
8.5
SUMMARY
In this chapter we have presented the state-of-the-art research progress and results
of secure distributed data storage in cloud computing. Cloud computing has
acquired considerable attention from both industry and academia in recent years.
Among all the major building blocks of cloud computing, data storage plays a very
important role. Currently, there are several challenges in implementing distributed
storage in cloud computing environments. These challenges will need to be
addressed before users can enjoy the full advantages of cloud computing. In
addition, security is always a signiﬁcant issue in any computing system. Conse-
quently,wesurveyedanumberoftopicsrelatedtothechallengingissuesofsecuring
distributed data storage, including database outsourcing and query integrity
assurance, data integrity in untrustworthy storage, Web-application-based secur-
ity, and multimedia data security. It is anticipated that the technologies developed
in the aforementioned research will contribute to paving the way for securing
distributed data storage environments within cloud computing.
REFERENCES
1.
J. A. Garay, R. Gennaro, C. Jutla, and T. Rabin, Secure distributed storage and
retrieval, in Proceedings of the 11th International workshop on Distributed
Algorithms, Saarbrucken, pp. 275289 Germany, September 1997.
2.
V. Kher and Y. Kim, Securing distributed storage: Challenges, techniques, and
systems, in Proceedings of the 2005 ACM Workshop on Storage Security and
Survivability, Fairfax, VA, November 11, 2005.
3.
R. Ranjan, A. Harwood, and R. Buyya, Peer-to-peer-based resource discovery in
global grids: A tutorial, IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 10(2), 2008,
pp. 633.
4.
K. M. Khan, Security dynamics of cloud computing, Cutter IT Journal, June/July
2009, pp. 3843.
5.
J. Heiser and M. Nicolett, Assessing the Security Risks of Cloud Computing,
Gartner Inc., June 2, 2008.
6.
G. A. Gibson and R. V. Meter, Network attached storage architecture, Commu-
nications of the ACM, 43(11): 3745, 2000.
246
SECURE DISTRIBUTED DATA STORAGE IN CLOUD COMPUTING


7.
Amazon Import/Export Developer Guid”, Version 1.2, http://aws.amazon.com/
documentation/, August 2009.
8.
Microsoft
Azure
Services
Platform,
http://www.microsoft.com/azure/default.
mspx, 2009.
9.
Google, What is Google App Engine?, http://code.google.com/appengine/docs/
whatisgoogleappengine.html, September 2009.
10.
Microsoft Azura MSDN API, http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/dd179394.
aspx, 2009.
11.
Google mail, http://groups.google.com/group/google-appengine/browse-thread/
thread/782aea7f85ecbf98/8a9a505e8aaee07a?show_docid=8a9a505e8aaee07a#
12.
W.-S. Ku, L. Hu, C. Shahabi, and H. Wang, Query integrity assurance of location-
based services accessing outsourced spatial databases, in Proceedings of the
International Symposium on Spatial and Temporal Databases (SSTD), 2009,
pp. 8097.
13.
H. Hacigu¨ mu¨ s, S. Mehrotra, and B. R. Iyer, Providing database as a service, in
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE),
2002, p. 29.
14.
R. Agrawal, J. Kiernan, R. Srikant, and Y. Xu, Order-preserving encryption for
numeric data, in Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Management
of Data (SIGMOD), 2004, pp. 563574.
15.
P. T. Devanbu, M. Gertz, C. U. Martel, and S. G. Stubblebine, Authentic third-
party data publication, in Proceedings of the IFIP Working Conference on Data and
Applications Security (DBSec), 2000, pp. 101112.
16.
R. C. Merkle, A certiﬁed digital signature, in Proceedings of the Annual Interna-
tional Cryptology Conference (CRYPTO), 1989, pp. 218238.
17.
E. Mykletun, M. Narasimha, and G. Tsudik, Authentication and integrity in
outsourced databases, in Proceedings of the Network and Distributed System
Security Symposium (NDSS), 2004.
18.
H.-H. Pang, A. Jain, K. Ramamritham, and K.-L. Tan, Verifying completeness of
relational query results in data publishing, in Proceedings of the ACM International
Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD), 2005, pp. 407418.
19.
F. Li, M. Hadjieleftheriou, G. Kollios, and L. Reyzin, Dynamic authenticated
index structures for outsourced databases, in Proceedings of the ACM International
Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD), 2006, pp. 121132.
20.
R. Sion, Query execution assurance for outsourced databases, in Proceedings
of the International Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB), 2005,
pp. 601612.
21.
M. Xie, H. Wang, J. Yin, and X. Meng, Integrity auditing of outsourced data, in
Proceedings of the International Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB),
2007, pp. 782793.
22.
H. Wang, J. Yin, C.-S. Perng, and P. S. Yu, Dual encryption for query integrity
assurance, in Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge
Management (CIKM), 2008, pp. 863872.
23.
Y, Yang, S, Papadopoulos, D, Papadias, and G. Kollios, Spatial outsourcing for
location-based services, in IEEE International Conference on Data Engineering
(ICDE), 2008, pp. 10821091.
REFERENCES
247


24.
M.-L. Yiu, G. Ghinita, C. S. Jensen, and P. Kalnis, Outsourcing search services on
private spatial data, in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Data
Engineering (ICDE), 2009, pp. 11401143.
25.
Y. Deswarte, J.-J. Quisquater, and A. Saidane, Remote integrity checking, in
Integrity and Internal Control in Information Systems VI, Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Boston, 2003, pp. 111.
26.
D. L. Gazzaoni-Filho and P. S. Licciardi-Messeder-Barreto, Demonstrating data
possession and uncheatable data transfer, Cryptology ePrint Archive, Report 2006/
150, http://eprint.iacr.org/, 2006.
27.
F. Sebe, J. Domingo-Ferrer, A. Martinez-Balleste, Y. Deswarte, and J.-J. Quis-
quater, Efﬁcient remote data possession checking in critical information infra-
structure,
IEEE
Transactions
on
Knowledge
and
Data
Engineering,
20(8):
10341038, 2008.
28.
G. Ateniese, R. Burns, R. Curtmola, J. Herring, L. Kissner, Z. Peterson, and
D. Song, Provable data possession at untrusted stores, in Proceedings 14th
ACM Conference on Computer and Communication Security (CCS’07), 2007,
pp. 598609.
29.
M. D. Dikaiakos, D. Katsaros, G. Pallis, A. Vakali, P. Mehra: Guest editors
introduction: Cloud computing, IEEE Internet Computing, 12(5), 2009, pp. 1013.
30.
S. Murugesan, Cloud computing: IT’s day in the sun?, in Cutter Consortium, 2009,
http://www.cutter.com/content/itjournal/fulltext/2009/06/index.html.
31.
Web Application Security Consortium, www.webappsec.org, 2009.
32.
M. A. Niazi and A. R. Baig, Phased approach to simulation of security algorithms
for ambient intelligent (ami) environments, the Winter Simulation Conference,
Washington D.C., December 912, 2007.
33.
Z. Su, J. Katto, and Y. Yasuda, Optimal replication algorithm for scalable
streaming media in contents delivery networks, IEICE Transactions on Information
and Systems, E87(12):27232732, 2004.
34.
A. Rowstron and P. Druschel, Storage management and caching in PAST, a large-
scale, persistent peer-to-peer storage utility, in Proceedings of the Eighth Workshop
on Hot Topics in Operating Systems, Banff, Canada, 2001, pp. 7580.
35.
Z. Su, T. Washizawa, J. Katto, and Y. Yasuda, Integrated pre-fetching and
replacing algorithm for graceful image caching, IEICE Transactions on Commu-
nications, E89-B(9):27532763, 2003.
36.
A. Stamos, A. Becherer, and N. Wilcox, Cloud computing models and vulner-
abilities: Raining on the trendy new parade, in Blackhat USA 2009, Las Vegas,
Nevada.
37.
H. Hacigu¨ mu¨ s, B. R. Iyer, C. Li, and S. Mehrotra, Executing SQL over encrypted
data in the database-service-provider model, in Proceedings of the ACM Interna-
tional Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD), 2002, pp. 216227.
248
SECURE DISTRIBUTED DATA STORAGE IN CLOUD COMPUTING


PART III
PLATFORM AND SOFTWARE
AS A SERVICE (PAAS/IAAS)
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>


CHAPTER 9
ANEKA—INTEGRATION OF PRIVATE
AND PUBLIC CLOUDS
CHRISTIAN VECCHIOLA, XINGCHEN CHU, MICHAEL MATTESS, and
RAJKUMAR BUYYA
9.1
INTRODUCTION
A growing interest in moving software applications, services, and even infra-
structure resources from in-house premises to external providers has been
witnessed recently. A survey conducted by F5 Networks between June and
July 20091 showed that such a trend has now reached a critical mass; and an
increasing number of IT managers have already adopted, or are considering
adopting, this approach to implement IT operations. This model of making IT
resources available, known as Cloud Computing [1], opens new opportunities to
small, medium-sized, and large companies. It is not necessary anymore to bear
considerable costs for maintaining the IT infrastructures or to plan for peak
demand. Instead, infrastructure and applications can scale elastically according
to the business needs at a reasonable price. The possibility of instantly reacting to
thedemandof customerswithoutlong-termplanning isoneofthemostappealing
features of cloud computing, and it has been a key factor in making this trend
popular among technology and business practitioners.
As a result of this growing interest, the major players in the IT industry such
as Google, Amazon, Microsoft, Sun, and Yahoo have started offering cloud-
computing-based solutions that cover the entire IT computing stack, from
hardware to applications and services. These offerings have become quickly
Cloud Computing: Principles and Paradigms,
Edited by Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg and
Andrzej Goscinski
Copyright r 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
1The survey, available at http://www.f5.com/pdf/reports/cloud-computing-survey-results-2009.pdf,
interviewed 250 IT companies with at least 2500 employees worldwide and targeted the following
personnel: managers, directors, vice presidents, and senior vice presidents.
251


popular and led to the establishment of the concept of “Public Cloud,” which
represents a publicly accessible distributed system hosting the execution of
applications and providing services billed on a pay-per-use basis. After an
initial enthusiasm for this new trend, it soon became evident that a solution
built on outsourcing the entire IT infrastructure to third parties would not be
applicable in many cases, especially when there are critical operations to be
performed and security concerns to consider. Moreover, with the public cloud
distributed anywhere on the planet, legal issues arise and they simply make it
difﬁcult to rely on a virtual public infrastructure for any IT operation. As an
example, data location and conﬁdentiality are two of the major issues that scare
stakeholders to move into the cloud—data that might be secure in one country
may not be secure in another. In many cases though, users of cloud services
don’t know where their information is held and different jurisdictions can
apply. It could be stored in some data center in either Europe, (a) where the
European Union favors very strict protection of privacy, or (b) America, where
laws such as the U.S. Patriot Act2 invest government and other agencies
with virtually limitless powers to access information including that belonging
to companies. In addition, enterprises already have their own IT infra-
structures. In spite of this, the distinctive feature of cloud computing still
remains appealing, and the possibility of replicating in-house (on their own IT
infrastructure) the resource and service provisioning model proposed by cloud
computing led to the development of the “Private Cloud” concept.
Private clouds are virtual distributed systems that rely on a private infra-
structure and provide internal users with dynamic provisioning of comput-
ing resources. Differently from public clouds, instead of a pay-as-you-go
model, there could be other schemes in place, which take into account the
usage of the cloud and proportionally bill the different departments or
sections of the enterprise. Private clouds have the advantage of keeping in-
house the core business operations by relying on the existing IT infrastructure
and reducing the burden of maintaining it once the cloud has been set up. In
this scenario, security concerns are less critical, since sensitive information
does not ﬂow out of the private infrastructure. Moreover, existing IT resources
can be better utilized since the Private cloud becomes accessible to all the
division of the enterprise. Another interesting opportunity that comes with
private clouds is the possibility of testing applications and systems at a
comparatively lower price rather than public clouds before deploying them
on the public virtual infrastructure. In April 2009, a Forrester Report [2] on
the beneﬁts of delivering in-house cloud computing solutions for enterprises
2The U.S. Patriot Act is a statute enacted by the United States Government that increases the
ability of law enforcement agencies to search telephone, e-mail communications, medical, ﬁnancial,
and other records; it eases restrictions on foreign intelligence gathering within the United States.
The full text of the act is available at the Web site of the Library of the Congress at the following
address: http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/z?c107:H.R.3162.ENR (accessed December 5, 2009).
252
ANEKA—INTEGRATION OF PRIVATE AND PUBLIC CLOUDS


highlighted some of the key advantages of using a private cloud computing
infrastructure:
 Customer Information Protection. Despite assurances by the public cloud
leaders about security, few provide satisfactory disclosure or have long
enough histories with their cloud offerings to provide warranties about the
speciﬁc level of security put in place in their system. Security in-house is
easier to maintain and to rely on.
 Infrastructure Ensuring Service Level Agreements (SLAs). Quality of
service implies that speciﬁc operations such as appropriate clustering
and failover, data replication, system monitoring and maintenance, dis-
aster recovery, and other uptime services can be commensurate to the
application needs. While public clouds vendors provide some of these
features, not all of them are available as needed.
 Compliance with Standard Procedures and Operations. If organizations
are subject to third-party compliance standards, speciﬁc procedures have
to be put in place when deploying and executing applications. This could
be not possible in the case of virtual public infrastructure.
In spite of these advantages, private clouds cannot easily scale out in the case of
peak demand, and the integration with public clouds could be a solution to the
increased load. Hence, hybrid clouds, which are the result of a private cloud
growing and provisioning resources from a public cloud, are likely to be best
option for the future in many cases. Hybrid clouds allow exploiting existing
IT infrastructures, maintaining sensitive information within the premises,
and naturally growing and shrinking by provisioning external resources and
releasing them when needed. Security concerns are then only limited to the
public portion of the cloud, which can be used to perform operations with less
stringent constraints but that are still part the system workload.
Platform as a Service (PaaS) solutions offer the right tools to implement and
deploy hybrid clouds. They provide enterprises with a platform for creating,
deploying, and managing distributed applications on top of existing infra-
structures. They are in charge of monitoring and managing the infrastructure
and acquiring new nodes, and they rely on virtualization technologies in order
to scale applications on demand. There are different implementations of the
PaaS model; in this chapter we will introduce Manjrasoft Aneka, and we will
discuss how to build and deploy hybrid clouds based on this technology. Aneka
[3] is a programming and management platform for building and deploying
cloud computing applications. The core value of Aneka is its service-oriented
architecture that creates an extensible system able to address different applica-
tion scenarios and deployments such as public, private, and heterogeneous
clouds. On top of these, applications that can be expressed by means of
different programming models can transparently execute under the desired
service-level agreement.
9.1
INTRODUCTION
253


The remainder of this chapter is organized as follows: In the next section
we will brieﬂy review the technologies and tools for Cloud Computing by
presenting both the commercial solution and the research projects currently
available, we will then introduce Aneka in Section 9.3 and provide an overview
of the architecture of the system. In Section 9.4 we will detail the resource
provisioning service that represents the core feature for building hybrid clouds.
Its architecture and implementation will be described in Section 9.5, together
with a discussion about the desired features that a software platform support
hybrid clouds should offer. Some thoughts and future directions for practi-
tioners will follow, before the conclusions.
9.2
TECHNOLOGIES AND TOOLS FOR CLOUD COMPUTING
Cloud computing covers the entire computing stack from hardware infra-
structure to end-user software applications. Hence, there are heterogeneous
offerings addressing different niches of the market. In this section we will
concentrate mostly on the Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) and Platform
as a Service (PaaS) implementations of the cloud computing model by ﬁrst
presenting a subset of the most representative commercial solutions and then
discussing the few research projects and platforms, which attracted consider-
able attention.
Amazon is probably the major player for what concerns the Infrastructure-
as-a-Service solutions in the case of public clouds. Amazon Web Services [4]
deliver a set of services that, when composed together, form a reliable, scalable,
and economically accessible cloud. Within the wide range of services offered, it
is worth noting that Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) [5] and Simple
Storage Service (S3) [6] allow users to quickly obtain virtual compute resources
and storage space, respectively. GoGrid [7] provides customer with a similar
offer: it allows users to deploy their own distributed system on top of their
virtual infrastructure. By using the GoGrid Web interface users can create
their custom virtual images, deploy database and application servers, and
mount new storage volumes for their applications. Both GoGrid and Amazon
EC2 charge their customers on a pay-as-you-go basis, and resources are priced
per hours of usage. 3Tera AppLogic [8] lays at the foundation of many public
clouds, it provides a grid operating system that includes workload distribution,
metering, and management of applications. These are described in a platform-
independent manner, and AppLogic takes care of deploying and scaling them
on demand. Together with AppLogic, which can also be used to manage and
deploy private clouds, 3Tera also provides cloud hosting solutions and, because
of its grid operating system, makes the transition from the private to the public
virtual infrastructure simple and completely transparent. Solutions that are
completely based on a PaaS approach for public clouds are Microsoft Azure
and Google AppEngine. Azure [9] allows developing scalable applications for
the cloud. It is a cloud services operating system that serves as the development,
254
ANEKA—INTEGRATION OF PRIVATE AND PUBLIC CLOUDS


runtime, and control environment for the Azure Services Platform. By using the
Microsoft Azure SDK, developers can create services that leverage the .NET
framework. These services are then uploaded to the Microsoft Azure
portal and executed on top of Windows Azure. Additional services such as
workﬂow
management
and
execution,
web
services
orchestration,
and
SQL data storage are provided to empower the hosted applications. Azure
customers are billed on a pay-per-use basis and by taking into account the
different services: compute, storage, bandwidth, and storage transactions.
Google AppEngine [10] is a development platform and a runtime environment
focusing primarily on web applications that will be run on top of Google’s
server infrastructure. It provides a set of APIs and an application model
that allow developers to take advantage of additional services provided by
Google such as Mail, Datastore, Memcache, and others. Developers can create
applications in Java, Python, and JRuby. These applications will be run within
a sandbox, and AppEngine will take care of automatically scaling when needed.
Google provides a free limited service and utilizes daily and per minute quotas
to meter and price applications requiring professional service.
Different options are available for deploying and managing private clouds.
At the lowest level, virtual machine technologies such as Xen [11], KVM [12],
and VMware [13] can help building the foundations of a virtual infrastructure.
On top of this, virtual machine managers such as VMWare vCloud [14] and
Eucalyptus [15] allow the management of a virtual infrastructure and turning a
cluster or a desktop grid into a private cloud. Eucalyptus provides a full
compatibility with the Amazon Web Services interfaces and supports different
virtual machine technologies such as Xen, VMWare, and KVM. By using
Eucalyptus, users can test and deploy their cloud applications on the private
premises and naturally move to the public virtual infrastructure provided by
Amazon EC2 and S3 in a complete transparent manner. VMWare vCloud is
the solution proposed by VMWare for deploying virtual infrastructure as either
public or private clouds. It is built on top of the VMWare virtual machine
technology and provides an easy way to migrate from the private premises to
the public infrastructure that leverages VMWare for infrastructure virtuali-
zation. For what concerns the Platform-as-a-Service solutions, we can notice
DataSynapse, Elastra, Zimory Pools, and the already mentioned App-
Logic. DataSynapse [16] is a global provider of application virtualization
software. By relying on the VMWare, virtualization technology provides a
ﬂexible environment that converts a data center into a private cloud. Elastra
[17] cloud server is a platform for easily conﬁguring and deploying distributed
application infrastructures on clouds: by using a simple control panel, admin-
istrators can visually describe the distributed application in terms of compo-
nents and connections and then deploying them on one or more cloud
providers such Amazon EC2 or VMware ESX. Cloud server can provision
resources from either private or public clouds, thus deploying application on
hybrid infrastructures. Zimory [18], a spinoff company from Deutsche Tele-
kom, provides a software infrastructure layer that automates the use of
9.2
TECHNOLOGIES AND TOOLS FOR CLOUD COMPUTING
255


resource pools based on Xen, KVM, and VMware virtualization technologies.
It allows creating an internal cloud composed by sparse private and public
resources that both host the Zimory’s software agent and provides facilities for
quickly migrating applications from one data center to another and utilizing at
best the existing infrastructure.
The wide range of commercial offerings for deploying and managing private
and public clouds mostly rely on a few key virtualization technologies, on
top of which additional services and features are provided. In this sense, an
interesting research project combining public and private clouds and adding
advanced services such as resource reservation is represented by the coordi-
nated use of OpenNebula [19] and Haizea [20]. OpenNebula is a virtual
infrastructure manager that can be used to deploy and manage virtual machines
on local resources or on external public clouds, automating the setup of the
virtual machines regardless of the underlying virtualization layer (Xen, KVM,
or VMWare are currently supported) or external cloud such as Amazon EC2. A
key feature of OpenNebula’s architecture is its highly modular design, which
facilitates integration with any virtualization platform and third-party compo-
nent in the cloud ecosystem, such as cloud toolkits, virtual image managers,
service managers, and VM schedulers such as Haizea. Haizea is a resource lease
manager providing leasing capabilities not found in other cloud systems, such
as advance reservations and resource preemption. Integrated together, Open-
Nebula and Haizea constitute a virtual management infrastructure providing
ﬂexible and advanced capabilities for resource management in hybrid clouds.
A similar set of capabilities is provided by OpenPEX [21], which allows users
to provision resources ahead of time through advance reservations. It also
incorporates a bilateral negotiation protocol that allows users and providers to
come to an agreement by exchanging offers and counter offers. OpenPEX
natively supports Xen as a virtual machine manager (VMM), but additional
plug-ins can be integrated into the system to support other VMMs. Nimbus
[22], formerly known as Globus Workspaces, is another framework that
provides a wide range of extensibility points. It is essentially a framework
that allows turning a cluster into an Infrastructure-as-a-Service cloud. What
makes it interesting from the perspective of hybrid clouds is an extremely
modular architecture that allows the customization of many tasks: resource
scheduling, network leases, accounting, propagation (intra VM ﬁle transfer),
and ﬁne control VM management.
All of the previous research platforms are mostly IaaS implementation of the
cloud computing model: They provide a virtual infrastructure management
layer that is enriched with advanced features for resource provisioning and
scheduling. Aneka, which is both a commercial solution and a research
platform, positions itself as a Platform-as-a-Service implementation. Aneka
provides not only a software infrastructure for scaling applications, but also a
wide range of APIs that help developers to design and implement applications
that can transparently run on a distributed infrastructure whether this be the
local cluster or the cloud. Aneka, as OpenNebula and Nimbus, is characterized
256
ANEKA—INTEGRATION OF PRIVATE AND PUBLIC CLOUDS


by a modular architecture that allows a high level of customization and
integration with existing technologies, especially for what concerns resource
provisioning. Like Zimory, the core feature of Aneka is represented by a
conﬁgurable software agent that can be transparently deployed on both
physical and virtual resources and constitutes the runtime environment for
the cloud. This feature, together with the resource provisioning infrastructure,
is at the heart of Aneka-based hybrid clouds. In the next sections we will
introduce the key feature of Aneka and describe in detail the architecture of the
resource provisioning service that is responsible of integrating cloud resources
into the existing infrastructure.
9.3
ANEKA CLOUD PLATFORM
Aneka [3] is a software platform and a framework for developing distributed
applications on the cloud. It harnesses the computing resources of a hetero-
geneous network of workstations and servers or data centers on demand.
Aneka provides developers with a rich set of APIs for transparently exploiting
these resources by expressing the application logic with a variety of program-
ming abstractions. System administrators can leverage a collection of tools to
monitor and control the deployed infrastructure. This can be a public cloud
available to anyone through the Internet, a private cloud constituted by a
set of nodes with restricted access within an enterprise, or a hybrid cloud
where external resources are integrated on demand, thus allowing applications
to scale.
Figure 9.1 provides a layered view of the framework. Aneka is essentially an
implementation of the PaaS model, and it provides a runtime environment for
executing applications by leveraging the underlying infrastructure of the cloud.
Developers can express distributed applications by using the API contained in
the Software Development Kit (SDK) or by porting existing legacy applica-
tions to the cloud. Such applications are executed on the Aneka cloud,
represented by a collection of nodes connected through the network hosting
the Aneka container. The container is the building block of the middleware and
represents the runtime environment for executing applications; it contains the
core functionalities of the system and is built up from an extensible collection of
services that allow administrators to customize the Aneka cloud. There are
three classes of services that characterize the container:
 Execution Services. They are responsible for scheduling and executing
applications. Each of the programming models supported by Aneka
deﬁnes specialized implementations of these services for managing the
execution of a unit of work deﬁned in the model.
 Foundation Services. These are the core management services of the
Aneka container. They are in charge of metering applications, allocating
9.3
ANEKA CLOUD PLATFORM
257


resources for execution, managing the collection of available nodes, and
keeping the services registry updated.
 Fabric Services: They constitute the lowest level of the services stack of
Aneka and provide access to the resources managed by the cloud. An
Applications: Development and Management
Software Development Kit
Middleware: Container
Foundation Services
Foundation Services
Fabric Services
API
Task Model
Membership
Hardware Profiling
Infrastructure
ECMA 334-335: .NET or Mono/Windows and Linux and Mac
Physical Resources
Virtualized Resources
IBM
Amazon
Microsoft
Private Cloud (LAN)
Dynamic Resource Provisioning
Platform Abstraction Layer (PAL)
Accounting
Licensing
…
…
Storage
Thread Model
MapReduce Model
Persistence
Security
…
Tutorials
Samples
Web Services: SLA and Management
Management Studio
Admin. Portal
Management Kit
Resource Reservation
FIGURE 9.1. Aneka framework architecture.
258
ANEKA—INTEGRATION OF PRIVATE AND PUBLIC CLOUDS


important service in this layer is the Resource Provisioning Service, which
enables horizontal scaling3 in the cloud. Resource provisioning makes
Aneka elastic and allows it to grow or to shrink dynamically to meet the
QoS requirements of applications.
The container relies on a platform abstraction layer that interfaces it with the
underlying host, whether this is a physical or a virtualized resource. This makes
the container portable over different runtime environments that feature an
implementation of the ECMA 334 [23] and ECMA 335 [24] speciﬁcations (such
as the .NET framework or Mono).
Aneka also provides a tool for managing the cloud, allowing adminis-
trators to easily start, stop, and deploy instances of the Aneka container on
new resources and then reconﬁgure them dynamically to alter the behavior of
the cloud.
9.4
ANEKA RESOURCE PROVISIONING SERVICE
The most signiﬁcant beneﬁt of cloud computing is the elasticity of resources,
services, and applications, which is the ability to automatically scale out based
on demand and users’ quality of service requests. Aneka as a PaaS not only
features multiple programming models allowing developers to easily build their
distributed applications, but also provides resource provisioning facilities in a
seamless and dynamic fashion. Applications managed by the Aneka container
can be dynamically mapped to heterogeneous resources, which can grow or
shrink according to the application’s needs. This elasticity is achieved by means
of the resource provisioning framework, which is composed primarily of
services built into the Aneka fabric layer.
Figure 9.2 provides an overview of Aneka resource provisioning over private
and public clouds. This is a typical scenario that a medium or large enterprise
may encounter; it combines privately owned resources with public rented
resources to dynamically increase the resource capacity to a larger scale.
Private resources identify computing and storage elements kept in the
premises that share similar internal security and administrative policies. Aneka
identiﬁes two types of private resources: static and dynamic resources. Static
resources are constituted by existing physical workstations and servers that
may be idle for a certain period of time. Their membership to the Aneka cloud
is manually conﬁgured by administrators and does not change over time.
Dynamic resources are mostly represented by virtual instances that join and
leave the Aneka cloud and are controlled by resource pool managers that
provision and release them when needed.
3Horizontal scaling is the process of adding more computing nodes to a system. It is counterposed
to vertical scaling, which is the process of increasing the computing capability of a single computer
resource.
9.4
ANEKA RESOURCE PROVISIONING SERVICE
259


Public resources reside outside the boundaries of the enterprise and
are provisioned by establishing a service-level agreement with the external
provider. Even in this case we can identify two classes: on-demand and
reserved resources. On-demand resources are dynamically provisioned by
resource pools for a ﬁxed amount of time (for example, an hour) with no
long-term commitments and on a pay-as-you-go basis. Reserved resources
are provisioned in advance by paying a low, one-time fee and mostly
suited for long-term usage. These resources are actually the same as static
resources, and no automation is needed in the resource provisioning service to
manage them.
Despite the speciﬁc classiﬁcation previously introduced, resources are
managed uniformly once they have joined the Aneka cloud and all the standard
operations that are performed on statically conﬁgured nodes can be transpar-
ently applied to dynamic virtual instances. Moreover, speciﬁc operations
pertaining to dynamic resources, such as join and leave, are seen as connection
and disconnection of nodes and transparently handled. This is mostly due to
Dynamic Provisioning
Dynamic Provisioning
Aneka
Static deployment
Physical Desktops/Servers
Private Cloud
Public Cloud
Virtual Machines
Internet
Interanet
FIGURE 9.2. Aneka resource provisioning over private and public clouds.
260
ANEKA—INTEGRATION OF PRIVATE AND PUBLIC CLOUDS


the indirection layer provided by the Aneka container that abstracts the speciﬁc
nature of the hosting machine.
9.4.1
Resource Provisioning Scenario
Figure 9.3 illustrates a possible scenario in which the resource provisioning
service becomes important. A private enterprise maintains a private cloud,
which consists of (a) ﬁve physical dedicated desktops from its engineering
department and (b) a small data center managed by Xen Hypervisor providing
virtual machines with the maximum capacity of 12 VMs. In most of the cases,
this setting is able to address the computing needs of the enterprise. In the case
of peak computing demand, additional resources can be provisioned by
leveraging the virtual public infrastructure. For example, a mission critical
application could require at least 30 resources to complete within an hour, and
the customer is willing to spend a maximum of 5 dollars to achieve this goal. In
this case, the Aneka Resource Provisioning service becomes a fundamental
infrastructure component to address this scenario.
In this case, once the client has submitted the application, the Aneka
scheduling engine detects that the current capacity in terms of resources (5
dedicated nodes) is not enough to satisfy the user’s QoS requirement and to
complete the application on time. An additional 25 resources must be provi-
sioned. It is the responsibility of the Aneka Resource Provisioning service to
acquire these resources from both the private data center managed by Xen
Hypervisor and the Amazon public cloud. The provisioning service is conﬁg-
ured by default with a cost-effective strategy, which privileges the use of local
resources instead of the dynamically provisioned and chargeable ones. The
computing needs of the application require the full utilization of the local data
center that provides the Aneka cloud with 12 virtual machines. Such capacity is
still not enough to complete the mission critical application in time; and the
Request(30, $5)
Client
Provisioning Service
Provision(13, $1.105)
Provision(12, 0)
Aneka
Join(5, 0)
Enterprise A-
Cloud
Dedicated Desktops
Private Data Center
Capacity(12 VMs)
Capacity(5)
FIGURE 9.3. Use case of resource provisioning under Aneka.
9.4
ANEKA RESOURCE PROVISIONING SERVICE
261


remaining 13 resources are rented from Amazon for a minimum of one hour,
which incurs a few dollars’ cost.4
This is not the only scenario that Aneka can support, and different
provisioning patterns can be implemented. Another simple strategy for provi-
sioning resources could be minimizing the execution time to let the application
ﬁnish as early as possible; this requires Aneka to request more powerful
resources from the Amazon public cloud. For example, in the previous case
instead of provisioning 13 small instances from Amazon, a major number of
resources, or more powerful resources, can be rented by spending the entire
budget available for the application. The resource provisioning infrastructure
can also serve broader purposes such as keeping the length of the system queue,
or the average waiting time of a job in the queue, under a speciﬁed value. In these
cases, speciﬁc policies can be implemented to ensure that the throughput of the
system is kept at a reasonable level.
9.5
HYBRID CLOUD IMPLEMENTATION
Currently, there is no widely accepted standard for provisioning virtual
infrastructure from Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) providers, but each
provider exposes its own interfaces and protocols. Hence, it is not possible
to seamlessly integrate different providers into one single infrastructure.
The resource provisioning service implemented in Aneka addresses these
issues and abstracts away the differences of providers’ implementation.
In this section we will brieﬂy review what the desired features of a hybrid
cloud implementation are and then we will give a closer a look at the solution
implemented in Aneka together with a practical application of the infra-
structure developed.
9.5.1
Design and Implementation Guidelines
The particular nature of hybrid clouds demands additional and speciﬁc
functionalities that software engineers have to consider while designing soft-
ware systems supporting the execution of applications in hybrid and dynamic
environments. These features, together with some guidelines on how to
implement them, are presented in the following:
 Support for Heterogeneity. Hybrid clouds are produced by heterogeneous
resources such as clusters, public or private virtual infrastructures, and
workstations. In particular, for what concerns a virtual machine manager,
it must be possible to integrate additional cloud service providers (mostly
4At the time of writing (October 2010), the cost for a small Linux-based instance in Amazon EC2 is
0.085 cent/hour and the total cost bore by the customer will be in this case 1.105 UD. We expect this
price to decrease even more in the next years.
262
ANEKA—INTEGRATION OF PRIVATE AND PUBLIC CLOUDS


IaaS providers) without major changes to the entire system design and
codebase. Hence, the speciﬁc code related to a particular cloud resource
provider should be kept isolated behind interfaces and within pluggable
components.
 Support for Dynamic and Open Systems. Hybrid clouds change their
composition and topology over time. They form as a result of dynamic
conditions such as peak demands or speciﬁc Service Level Agreements
attached to the applications currently in execution. An open and
extensible architecture that allows easily plugging new components
and rapidly integrating new features is of a great value in this case.
Speciﬁc enterprise architectural patterns can be considered while design-
ing such software systems. In particular, inversion of control and, more
precisely, dependency injection5 in component-based systems is really
helpful.
 Support for Basic VM Operation Management. Hybrid clouds integrate
virtual infrastructures with existing physical systems. Virtual infrastruc-
tures are produced by virtual instances. Hence, software frameworks that
support hypervisor-based execution should implement a minimum set of
operations. They include requesting a virtual instance, controlling its
status, terminating its execution, and keeping track of all the instances
that have been requested.
 Support for Flexible Scheduling Policies. The heterogeneity of resources
that constitute a hybrid infrastructure naturally demands for ﬂexible
scheduling policies. Public and private resources can be differently utili-
zed, and the workload should be dynamically partitioned into different
streams according to their security and quality of service (QoS) require-
ments. There is then the need of being able to transparently change
scheduling policies over time with a minimum impact on the existing
infrastructure and almost now downtimes. Conﬁgurable scheduling
policies are then an important feature.
 Support for Workload Monitoring. Workload monitoring becomes even
more important in the case of hybrid clouds where a subset of resources is
leased and resources can be dismissed if they are no longer necessary.
Workload monitoring is an important feature for any distributed mid-
dleware, in the case of hybrid clouds, it is necessary to integrate this
feature with scheduling policies that either directly or indirectly govern the
management of virtual instances and their leases.
5Dependency injection is a technique that allows conﬁguring and connecting components within a
software container (such as a Web or an application server) without hard coding their relation but
for example by providing an abstract speciﬁcation—for example, a conﬁguration ﬁle that speciﬁes
which component to instantiate and to connect them together. A detailed description of this
programming pattern can be found at the following link: http://martinfowler.com/articles/injection.
html (accessed December 2009).
9.5
HYBRID CLOUD IMPLEMENTATION
263


Those presented are, according to the authors, the most relevant features for
successfully supporting the deployment and the management of hybrid clouds.
In this list we did not extensively mention security that is transversal to all
features listed. A basic recommendation for implementing a security infra-
structure for any runtime environment is to use a Defense in Depth6 security
model whenever it is possible. This principle is even more important in
heterogeneous systems such as hybrid clouds, where both applications and
resources can represent treats to each other.
9.5.2
Aneka Hybrid Cloud Architecture
The Resource Provisioning Framework represents the foundation on top of
which Aneka-based hybrid clouds are implemented. In this section we will
introduce the components that compose this framework and brieﬂy describe
their interactions.
The basic idea behind the Resource Provisioning Framework is depicted in
Figure 9.4. The resource provisioning infrastructure is represented by a
collection of resource pools that provide access to resource providers, whether
they are external or internal, and managed uniformly through a speciﬁc
component called a resource pool manager. A detailed description of the
components follows:
Services
Aneka Container
Membership Catalogue
Membership Catalogue
Join/Leave
Scheduling Service
Resource Provisioning Service
List
Provision
Provision/Release
Release
Provisioning Service
Resource Pool Manager
FIGURE 9.4. System architecture of the Aneka Resource Provisioning Framework.
6Defense in depth is an information assurance (IA) strategy in which multiple layers of defense are
placed throughout an information technology (IT) system. More information is available at the
following link: http://www.nsa.gov/ia/_ﬁles/support/defenseindepth.pdf (accessed December 2009).
264
ANEKA—INTEGRATION OF PRIVATE AND PUBLIC CLOUDS


 Resource Provisioning Service. This is an Aneka-speciﬁc service that
implements the service interface and wraps the resource pool manager,
thus allowing its integration within the Aneka container.
 Resource Pool Manager. This manages all the registered resource pools
and decides how to allocate resources from those pools. The resource pool
manager provides a uniform interface for requesting additional resources
from any private or public provider and hides the complexity of managing
multiple pools to the Resource Provisioning Service.
 Resource Pool. This is a container of virtual resources that mostly come
from the same resource provider. A resource pool is in charge of manag-
ing the virtual resources it contains and eventually releasing them when
they are no longer in use. Since each vendor exposes its own speciﬁc
interfaces, the resource pool (a) encapsulates the speciﬁc implementation
of the communication protocol required to interact with it and (b)
provides the pool manager with a uniﬁed interface for acquiring, termi-
nating, and monitoring virtual resources.
The request for additional resources is generally triggered by a scheduler that
detects that the current capacity is not sufﬁcient to satisfy the expected quality
of services ensured for speciﬁc applications. In this case a provisioning request
is made to the Resource Provisioning Service. According to speciﬁc policies, the
pool manager determines the pool instance(s) that will be used to provision
resources and will forward the request to the selected pools. Each resource pool
will translate the forwarded request by using the speciﬁc protocols required by
the external provider and provision the resources. Once the requests are
successfully processed, the requested number of virtual resources will join the
Aneka cloud by registering themselves with the Membership Catalogue Service,
which keeps track of all the nodes currently connected to the cloud. Once joined
the cloud the provisioned resources are managed like any other node.
A release request is triggered by the scheduling service when provisioned
resources are no longer in use. Such a request is then forwarded to the
interested resources pool (with a process similar to the one described in
the previous paragraph) that will take care of terminating the resources when
more appropriate. A general guideline for pool implementation is to keep
provisioned resources active in a local pool until their lease time expires. By
doing this, if a new request arrives within this interval, it can be served without
leasing additional resources from the public infrastructure. Once a virtual
instance is terminated,
the
Membership
Catalogue
Service will
detect
a disconnection of the corresponding node and update its registry accordingly.
It can be noticed that the interaction ﬂow previously described is comple-
tely independent from the speciﬁc resource provider that will be integrated
into the system. In order to satisfy such a requirement, modularity and well-
designed interfaces between components are very important. The current
design, implemented in Aneka, maintains the speciﬁc implementation details
9.5
HYBRID CLOUD IMPLEMENTATION
265


within the ResourcePool implementation, and resource pools can be dynami-
cally conﬁgured and added by using the dependency injection techniques, which
are already implemented for conﬁguring the services hosted in the container.
The current implementation of Aneka allows customizing the Resource
Provisioning Infrastructure by specifying the following elements:
 Resource Provisioning Service. The default implementation provides a
lightweight component that generally forwards the requests to the
resource Pool Manager. A possible extension of the system can be
the implementation of a distributed resource provisioning service that
can operate at this level or at the Resource Pool Manager level.
 Resource Pool Manager. The default implementation provides the basic
management features required for resource and provisioning request
forwarding.
 Resource Pools. The Resource Pool Manager exposes a collection of
resource pools that can be used. It is possible to add any implementation
that is compliant to the interface contract exposed by the Aneka
provisioning API, thus adding a heterogeneous open-ended set of external
providers to the cloud.
 Provisioning Policy. Scheduling services can be customized with resource
provisioning aware algorithms that can perform scheduling of applica-
tions by taking into account the required QoS.
The architecture of the Resource Provisioning Framework shares some features
with other IaaS implementations featuring conﬁgurable software containers,
such as OpenNebula [19] and Nimbus [22]. OpenNebula uses the concept of
cloud drivers in order to abstract the external resource providers and provides
a pluggable scheduling engine that supports the integration with advanced
schedulers such Haizea [20] and others. Nimbus provides a plethora of
extension points into its programming API, and among these there are hooks
for scheduling and resource management and the remote management (RM)
API. The ﬁrst ones control when and where a virtual machine will run, while
the RM API act as uniﬁed interface to Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)
implementations such as Amazon EC2 and OpenNebula. By providing a
speciﬁc implementation of RM API, it is possible to integrate other cloud
providers.
In the next paragraph, we will detail the implementation of the Amazon
EC2 resource pool to provide a practical example of a resource pool
implementation.
9.5.3
Use Case—The Amazon EC2 Resource Pool
Amazon EC2 is one of the most popular cloud resource providers. At the time
of writing it is listed among the top 10 companies providing cloud computing
266
ANEKA—INTEGRATION OF PRIVATE AND PUBLIC CLOUDS


services.7 It provides a Web service interface for accessing, managing, and
controlling virtual machine instances. The Web-service-based interface simpli-
ﬁes the integration of Amazon EC2 with any application. This is the case of
Aneka, for which a simple Web service client has been developed to allow the
interaction with EC2. In order to interact with Amazon EC2, several para-
meters are required:
 User Identity. This represents the account information used to authenticate
withAmazon EC2. The identityisconstitutedbyapairofencryptedkeysthat
are the access key and the secret key. These keys can be obtained from the
AmazonWebservicesportaloncetheuserhassignedin,andtheyarerequired
to perform any operation that involves Web service access.
 Resource Identity. The resource identity is the identiﬁer of a public or a
private Amazon Machine Image (AMI) that is used as template from
which to create virtual machine instances.
 Resource Capacity. This speciﬁes the different type of instance that will
be deployed by AmazonEC2.Instance types varyaccording tothe numberof
cores, the amount of memory, and other settings that affect the performance
of the virtual machine instance. Several types of images are available, those
commonly used are: small, medium, and large. The capacity of each type of
resource has been predeﬁned by Amazon and is charged differently.
This information is maintained in the EC2ResourcePoolConﬁguration class and
need to be provided by the administrator in order to conﬁgure the pool. Hence,
the implementation of EC2ResourcePool is forwarding the request of the pool
manager to EC2 by using the Web service client and the conﬁguration
information previously described. It then stores the metadata of each active
virtual instance for further use.
In order to utilize at best the virtual machine instances provisioned from
EC2, the pool implements a cost-effective optimization strategy. According to
the current business model of Amazon, a virtual machine instance is charged by
using one-hour time blocks. This means that if a virtual machine instance is
used for 30 minutes, the customer is still charged for one hour of usage. In order
to provide a good service to applications with a smaller granularity in terms of
execution times, the EC2ResourcePool class implements a local cache that
keeps track of the released instances whose time block is not expired yet. These
instances will be reused instead of activating new instances from Amazon.
With the cost-effective optimization strategy, the pool is able to minimize the
cost of provisioning resources from Amazon cloud and, at the same time,
achieve high utilization of each provisioned resource.
7Source:
http://www.networkworld.com/supp/2009/ndc3/051809-cloud-companies-to-watch.html
(accessed December 2009). A more recent review ranked Amazon still in the top ten (Source:
http://searchcloudcomputing.techtarget.com/generic/0,295582,sid201_gci1381115,00.html#slideshow)
9.5
HYBRID CLOUD IMPLEMENTATION
267


9.5.4
Implementation Steps for Aneka Resource Provisioning
Service
The resource provisioning service is a customized service which will be used to
enable cloud bursting by Aneka at runtime. Figure 9.5 demonstrates one of the
application scenarios that utilize resource provisioning to dynamically provi-
sion virtual machines from Amazon EC2 cloud.
The general steps of resource provisioning on demand in Aneka are the
following:
 The application submits its tasks to the scheduling service, which, in turns,
adds the tasks into the scheduling queue.
 The scheduling algorithm ﬁnds an appropriate match between a task and
a resource. If the algorithm could not ﬁnd enough resources for serving all
the tasks, it requests extra resources from the scheduling service.
 The scheduling service will send a ResourceProvisionMessage to provision
service and will ask provision service to get X number of resources as
determined by the scheduling algorithm.
Execution Service
Aneka Worker Container
Message Dispatcher
1. Submit Tasks
Aneka Container
Master Machine
Scheduling Service
Provision Service
Membership Service
Message Dispatcher
1. Submit Tasks
4. Provision
Scheduling
Algorithms
2. Schedule
Tasks
3. Request Extra
Resources
4. Provision
5. Start VMs
6. Start VMs with
Aneka VM Template
7. VM started, Join Aneka Network
Aneka Workers
8. Register
Membership
Task Queue
9. Dispatch Task to Worker
9. Dispatch to Execute
Aneka
AMI
Public Cloud
(remote resource)
Private Cloud
(local resource)
Amazon EC2
FIGURE 9.5. Aneka resource provisioning (cloud bursting) over Amazon EC2.
268
ANEKA—INTEGRATION OF PRIVATE AND PUBLIC CLOUDS


 Upon receiving the provision message, the provision service will delegate
the provision request to a component called resource pool manager, which
is responsible for managing various resource pools. A resource pool is a
logical view of a cloud resource provider, where the virtual machines
can be provisioned at runtime. Aneka resource provisioning supports
multiple resource pools such as Amazon EC2 pool and Citrix Xen server
pool.
 The resource pool manager knows how to communicate with each pool
and will provision the requested resources on demand. Based on the
requests from the provision service, the pool manager starts X virtual
machines by utilizing the predeﬁned virtual machine template already
conﬁgured to run Aneka containers.
 A worker instance of Aneka will be conﬁgured and running once a virtual
resource is started. All the work instances will then connect to the Aneka
master machine and will register themselves with Aneka membership
service.
 The scheduling algorithm will be notiﬁed by the membership service once
those work instances join the network, and it will start allocating pending
tasks to them immediately.
 Once the application is completed, all the provisioned resources will be
released by the provision service to reduce the cost of renting the virtual
machine.
9.6
VISIONARY THOUGHTS FOR PRACTITIONERS
The research on the integration of public and private clouds is still at its early
stage. Even though the adoption of cloud computingtechnologies is still growing,
delivering IT services via the cloud will be the norm in future. The key areas of
interest that need to be explored include security standardization; pricing models;
andmanagement andschedulingpoliciesfor heterogeneous environments. At the
time of writing, only limited research has been carried out in these ﬁelds.
As brieﬂy addressed in the introduction, security is one of the major
concerns in hybrid clouds. While private clouds signiﬁcantly reduce the security
risks concerned by retaining sensitive information within corporate boundaries,
in the case of hybrid clouds the workload that is delegated to the public portion
of the infrastructure is subject to the same security risks that are prevalent in
public clouds. In this sense, workload partitioning and classiﬁcation can help
in reducing the security risks for sensitive data. Keeping sensitive operations
within the boundaries of the private part of the infrastructure and ensuring that
the information ﬂow in the cloud is kept under control is a naı¨ve and probably
often limited solution. The major issues that need to be addressed are the
following: security of virtual execution environments (either hypervisors or
managed runtime environments for PaaS implementations), data retention,
9.6
VISIONARY THOUGHTS FOR PRACTITIONERS
269


possibility of massive outages, provider trust, and also jurisdiction issues that
can break the conﬁdentiality of data. These issues become even more crucial in
the case of hybrid clouds because of the dynamic nature of the way in which
public resources are integrated into the system. Currently, the security measures
and tools adopted for traditional distributed systems are used. Cloud compu-
ting brings not only challenges for security, but also advantages. Cloud
service providers can make sensible investments on the security infrastructure
and provide more secured environments than those provided by small en-
terprises. Moreover, a cloud’s virtual dynamic infrastructure makes it possible
to achieve better fault tolerance and reliability, greater resiliency to failure,
rapid reconstruction of services, and a low-cost approach to disaster recovery.
The lack of standardization is another important area that has to be covered.
Currently, each vendor publishes their own interfaces, and there is no common
agreement on a standard for exposing such services. This condition limits the
adoption of inter-cloud services on a global scale. As discussed in this chapter,
in order to integrate IaaS solutions from different vendors it is necessary to
implement ad hoc connectors. The lack of standardization covers not only the
programming and management interface, but also the use of abstract repre-
sentations for virtual images and active instances. An effort in this direction is
the Open Virtualization Format (OVF) [25], an open standard for packaging
and distributing virtual appliances or more generally software to be run in
virtual machines. However, even if endorsed by the major representative
companies in the ﬁeld (Microsoft, IBM, Dell, HP, VMWare, and XenSource)
and released as a preliminary standard by the Distributed Management Task
Force, the OVF speciﬁcation only captures the static representation of a virtual
instance; it is mostly used as a canonical way of distributing virtual machine
images. Many vendors and implementations simply use OVF as an import
format and convert it into their speciﬁc runtime format when running the
image. Additional effort has to be spent on deﬁning a common method to
represent live instances of applications and in providing a standard approach
to customizing these instances during startup.
Research in this area will be
necessary to completely eliminate vendor lock-in.8 In addition, when building a
hybrid cloud based on legacy hardware and virtual public infrastructure,
additional compatibility issues arise due to the heterogeneity of the runtime
environments: almost all the hypervisors support the x86 machine model,
which could constitute a technology barrier in the seamless transition from
private environments to public ones. Finally, as discussed by Keahey et al. [26],
there is a need for providing (a) a standardized way for describing and
comparing the quality of service (QoS) offerings of different cloud services
providers and (b) a standardized approach to benchmark those services. These
8In cloud computing, vendor lock-in relates to the condition in which a large installed base of a
customer is maintained within the virtual infrastructure of one vendor who does not disclose the
internals of their system, thus preventing the possibility of the customer moving their installed base
to another provider without considerable costs.
270
ANEKA—INTEGRATION OF PRIVATE AND PUBLIC CLOUDS


are all areas that have to be explored in order to take advantage of hetero-
geneous clouds, which, due to their dynamic nature, require automatic methods
for optimizing and monitoring the publicly provisioned services. An important
step in providing a standardization path and to foster the adoption of cloud
computing is the Open Cloud Manifesto,9 which provides a starting point for
the promotion of open clouds characterized by interoperability between
providers and true scalability for applications.
Since the integration of external resources comes with a price, it is interesting
to study how to optimize the usage of such resources. Currently, resources are
priced in time blocks, and often their granularity does not meet the needs of
enterprises. Virtual resource pooling, as provided by Aneka, is an initial step in
closing this gap, but new strategies for optimizing the usage of external
provisioned resources can be devised. For example, intelligent policies that
can predict when to release a resource by relying on the statistics of the
workload can be investigated. Other policies could identify the optimal number
of resources to provision according to the application needs, the budget
allocated for the execution of the application, and the workload. Research in
this direction will become even more consistent when different pricing models
will be introduced by cloud providers. In this future scenario, the introduction
of a market place for brokering cloud resources and services will deﬁnitely give
more opportunities to fully realize the vision of cloud computing. Each vendor
will be able to advertise their services and customers will have more options to
choose from, eventually by relying on meta-brokering services. Once realized,
these opportunities will make the accessibility of cloud computing technology
more natural and at a fairer price, thus simplifying the integration of existing
computing infrastructure owned within the premises.
We believe that one of the major areas of interest in the next few years for
what concerns the implementation and the deployment of hybrid clouds will be
the scheduling of applications and the provisioning of resources for these
applications. In particular, due to the heterogeneous nature of hybrid clouds,
additional coordination between the private and the public service management
becomes fundamental. Hence, cloud schedulers will necessarily be integrated
with different aspects such as federate policy management tools, seamless
hybrid integration, federated security, information asset management, coordi-
nated provisioning control, and uniﬁed monitoring.
9.7
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
In this chapter we have presented the characteristics of hybrid clouds and
discussed their implementation and deployment by using Aneka. Hybrid clouds
emerge when an existing private infrastructure grows into a virtual public
9The Open Cloud Manifesto is available at: http://www.opencloudmanifesto.org (Accessed,
December, 2009).
9.7
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
271


infrastructure in order to handle its workload. We envision that this speciﬁc
scenario will be the most common in the future because hybrid clouds can
overcome speciﬁc disadvantages of both public and private clouds. They
can scale on demand and leverage the horse power of third-party data centers
and maintain the elaboration of sensitive information within the premises
of the enterprise. Different solutions are available for implementing hybrid
clouds; the most relevant to the discussed scenario are IaaS and PaaS imp-
lementaions. Among these we presented the solution proposed by Aneka,
which is an implementation of the PaaS model for cloud computing. The
Aneka container—the basic building block of Aneka clouds—can be easily
deployed on different hardware: a desktop PC, a workstation, a server, a
cluster, and even a virtual machine. This ﬂexibility allows the quick setup
of heterogeneous execution environments on top of which distributed
applications can run transparently. Such a feature constitutes a key element
for integrating computing resources from external providers into the private
infrastructure.
In order to support this scenario, we ﬁrst highlighted which are the desired
features of a reference model for hybrid cloud and then presented how these
characteristics are reﬂected into Aneka. Three major components compose
the provisioning framework: Resource Provisioning Service, Resource Pool
Manager, and Resource Pools. A fundamental role is played by resource
pools, which represent collections of computing nodes belonging to the same
domain. The abstraction provided by resource pools makes it possible to
integrate and leverage either public or private clouds uniformly. As a proof
of concept of the presented solution, we discussed a use case scenario that
involves the creation of a hybrid cloud composed by a set of workstations
that has been augmented by initially provisioning resources from a cluster
managed by a Xen Hypervisor and then by leveraging a public virtual
infrastructure such as Amazon EC2.
As a conclusion to the chapter, we introduced and discussed the future
directions of the research in hybrid clouds, we highlighted the major challenges
that have to be faced in order to promote a wider adoption of hybrid clouds,
and provided some insights into the initial efforts taken toward this direction.
In the future we aim to extend the resource provisioning framework by
providing more advanced scheduling techniques for heterogeneous environ-
ments. Additionally, we would like to extend the number of resource provider
actually supported. Currently, we are developing support for VMWare,
Eucalyptus, and InterGrid [27].
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Dileban Karunamoorthy and Mukaddim Pathan for
their useful insights on structuring the content of the chapter and their
suggestions for improving the presentation of the content.
272
ANEKA—INTEGRATION OF PRIVATE AND PUBLIC CLOUDS


REFERENCES
1.
M. Armbrust, A. Fox, R. Grifﬁth, A.D. Joseph, R. Katz, A. Konwinski, G. Lee,
D. Patterson, A. Rabkin, I. Stoika, and M. Zaharia, Above the clouds: A Berkeley
view of cloud computing, Technical Report, UC Berkeley Reliable Adaptive
Distributed Systems Laboratory, February 2009.
2.
J. Staten, S. Yates, J. Ryme, F. Gillett, and L. E. Nelson, Deliver Cloud Beneﬁts
Inside Your Walls: Economic and Self-Service Gains Are Within Reach, Forrester
Research Inc., April 2009.
3.
C. Vecchiola, X. Chu, and R. Buyya, Aneka: A software platform for .NET
cloud computing, in High Performance & Large Scale Computing, W. Gentzsch,
L. Grandinetti, and G. Joubert (eds.), IOS Press, Amsterdam, 2009.
4.
Amazon Web Services, http://aws.amazon.com (accessed October 21, 2010).
5.
Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud, http://aws.amazon.com/ec2/ (accessed October
21, 2010).
6.
Amazon Simple Storage Service, http://aws.amazon.com/s3/ (accessed October 21,
2010).
7.
GoGrid, http://www.gogrid.com (accessed October 21, 2010).
8.
3tera AppLogic, http://www.3tera.com/AppLogic/ (accessed October 21, 2010).
9.
Microsoft Azure, http://www.microsoft.com/windowsazure/ (accessed October 21,
2010).
10.
Google AppEngine, http://code.google.com/appengine/ (accessed October 21,
2010).
11.
Xen Hypervisor, http://xen.org/ (accessed October 21, 2010).
12.
Kernel-based
Virtual
Machine,
http://www.linux-kvm.org/page/Main_Page
(accessed October 21, 2010).
13.
VMWare
Business
Infrastructure
Virtualization,
http://www.vmware.com/
(accessed October 21, 2010).
14.
VMWare vCloud, http://www.vmware.com/solutions/cloud-computing/ (accessed
October 21, 2010).
15.
D. Nurmi, R. Wolski, C. Grzegorczyk, G. Obertelli, S. Soman, L. Youseff, and
D. Zagorodnov, The Eucalyptus open-source cloud computing system, in Proceed-
ings of 9th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster Computing and the Grid
(CCGrid 2009), Shanghai, China, May 2009.
16.
Datasynapse, http://www.datasynapse.com (accessed October 21, 2010).
17.
ElastraManage IT complexity, http://www.elastra.com
(accessed October 21,
2010).
18.
Zimory, http://www.zimory.com (accessed October 21, 2010).
19.
I. Llorente, R. Moreno-Vozmediano, and R. Montero, Cloud computing for on-
demand grid resource provisioning, in Advances in Parallel Computing, IOS Press,
Amsterdam, 2009, p. 18.
20.
B. Sotomayor, K. Keahey, and I. Foster, Combining batch execution and
leasing using virtual machines, in HPDC ’08: Proceedings of the 17th Intern-
ational Symposium on High Performance Distributed Computing, ACM, 2008,
pp. 8796.
REFERENCES
273


21.
S. Venugopal, J. Broberg, and R. Buyya, OpenPEX: An open provisioning and
execution systems for virtual machines, in Proceedings of the 17th International
Conference on Advanced Computing and Communications (ADCOM 2009), Ben-
galuru, India, December 1418, 2009.
22.
K. Keahey, I. Foster, T. Freeman, and X. Zhang, Virtual workspaces: Achieving
quality of service and quality of life on the grid, Scientiﬁc Programming, 13(4):
265276, 2005.
23.
J. Jagger, N. Perry, and P. Sestoft, C# Annotated Standard, Morgan Kaufmann,
San Francisco, 2007.
24.
J.S. Miller, S. Ragsdale, The Common Language Infrastructure Annotated Stan-
dard, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 2004.
25.
Open Virtualization Format Speciﬁcation, Distributed Management Task Force,
http://www.dmtf.org/sites/default/ﬁles/standards/documents/DSP0243_1.1.0.pdf
(accessed October 21, 2010)
26.
K. Keahey, M. Tsugawa, A. Matsunaga, and J. A. B. Fort´es, Sky computing,
IEEE Internet Computing, 13(5):4351, 2009.
27.
A. Di Costanzo, M. Dias de Assunc¸ a˜ o, and R. Buyya, Harnessing cloud
technologies for a virtualized distributed computing infrastructure, IEEE Internet
Computing, 13(5):1422, 2009.
274
ANEKA—INTEGRATION OF PRIVATE AND PUBLIC CLOUDS


CHAPTER 10
COMETCLOUD: AN AUTONOMIC CLOUD
ENGINE
HYUNJOO KIM and MANISH PARASHAR
10.1
INTRODUCTION
Clouds typically have highly dynamic demands for resources with highly
heterogeneous and dynamic workloads. For example, the workloads associated
with the application can be quite dynamic, in terms of both the number of tasks
processed and the computation requirements of each task. Furthermore,
different applications may have very different and dynamic quality of service
(QoS) requirements; for example, one application may require high throughput
while another may be constrained by a budget, and a third may have to balance
both throughput and budget. The performance of a cloud service can also vary
based on these varying loads as well as failures, network conditions, and so on,
resulting in different “QoS” to the application.
Combining public cloud platforms and integrating them with existing grids
and data centers can support on-demand scale-up, scale-down, and scale-out.
Users may want to use resources in their private cloud (or data center or grid)
ﬁrst before scaling out onto a public cloud, and they may have a preference for
a particular cloud or may want to combine multiple clouds. However, such
integration and interoperability is currently nontrivial. Furthermore, integrat-
ing these public cloud platforms with exiting computational grids provides
opportunities for on-demand scale-up and scale-down, that is cloudbursts.
In this chapter, we present the CometCloud autonomic cloud engine. The
overarching goal of CometCloud is to realize a virtual computational cloud
with resizable computing capability, which integrates local computational
environments and public cloud services on-demand, and provide abstract-
ions and mechanisms to support a range of programming paradigms and
Cloud Computing: Principles and Paradigms,
Edited by Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg and
Andrzej Goscinski
Copyright r 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
275


applications requirements. Speciﬁcally, CometCloud enables policy-based
autonomic cloudbridging and cloudbursting. Autonomic cloudbridging enables
on-the-ﬂy integration of local computational environments (data centers, grids)
and public cloud services (such as Amazon EC2 [10] and Eucalyptus [20]), and
autonomic cloudbursting enables dynamic application scale-out to address
dynamic workloads, spikes in demands, and other extreme requirements.
CometCloud is based on a decentralized coordination substrate, and it
supports highly heterogeneous and dynamic cloud/grid infrastructures, inte-
gration of public/private clouds, and cloudbursts. The coordination substrate is
also used to support a decentralized and scalable task space that coordinates
the scheduling of task, submitted by a dynamic set of users, onto sets of
dynamically provisioned workers on available private and/or public cloud
resources based on their QoS constraints such as cost or performance. These
QoS constraints along with policies, performance history, and the state of
resources are used to determine the appropriate size and mix of the public and
private clouds that should be allocated to a speciﬁc application request.
This chapter also demonstrates the ability of CometCloud to support the
dynamic requirements of real applications (and multiple application groups)
with varied computational requirements and QoS constraints. Speciﬁcally, this
chapter describes two applications enabled by CometCloud, a computationally
intensive value at risk (VaR) application and a high-throughput medical image
registration. VaR is a market standard risk measure used by senior managers
and regulators to quantify the risk level of a ﬁrm’s holdings. A VaR calculation
should be completed within the limited time, and the computational require-
ments for the calculation can change signiﬁcantly. Image registration is the
process to determine the linear/nonlinear mapping between two images of
the same object or similar objects. In image registration, a set of image
registration methods are used by different (geographically distributed) research
groups to process their locally stored data. The set of images will be typically
acquired at different time, or from different perspectives, and will be in
different coordinate systems. It is therefore critical to align those images into
the same coordinate system before applying any image analysis.
The rest of this chapter is organized as follows. We present the CometCloud
architecture in Section 10.2. Section 10.3 elaborates policy-driven autonomic
cloudbursts,—speciﬁcally, autonomic cloudbursts for real-world applications,
autonomic cloudbridging over a virtual cloud, and runtime behavior of
CometCloud. Section 10.4 states the overview of VaR and image registration
applications. We evaluate the autonomic behavior of CometCloud in Section
10.5 and conclude this paper in Section 10.6.
10.2
COMETCLOUD ARCHITECTURE
CometCloud is an autonomic computing engine for cloud and grid environ-
ments. It is based on the Comet [1] decentralized coordination substrate, and it
276
COMETCLOUD: AN AUTONOMIC CLOUD ENGINE


supports highly heterogeneous and dynamic cloud/grid infrastructures, inte-
gration of public/private clouds, and autonomic cloudbursts. CometCloud is
based on a peer-to-peer substrate that can span enterprise data centers, grids,
and clouds. Resources can be assimilated on-demand and on-the-ﬂy into
its peer-to-peer overlay to provide services to applications. Conceptually,
CometCloud is composed of a programming layer, a service layer, and an
infrastructure layer; these layers are described in more detail in the following
section. CometCloud (and Comet) adapts the Squid [2] information discov-
ery scheme to deterministically map the information space onto the dynamic set
of peer nodes. The resulting structure is a locality preserving semantic
distributed hash table (DHT) on top of a self-organizing structured overlay.
It maintains content locality and guarantees that content-based queries, using
ﬂexible content descriptors in the form of keywords, partial keywords, and
wildcards, are delivered with bounded costs. Comet builds a tuple-based
coordination space abstraction using Squid, which can be associatively
accessed by all system peers without requiring the location information of
tuples and host identiﬁers. CometCloud also provides transient spaces that
enable applications to explicitly exploit context locality.
10.2.1
CometCloud Layered Abstractions
A schematic overview of the CometCloud architecture is presented in Fig-
ure 10.1. The infrastructure layer uses the Chord self-organizing overlay [3],
and the Squid [2] information discovery and content-based routing substrate
built on top of Chord. The routing engine [4] supports ﬂexible content-based
Application
Master/Worker/BOT
Programming
layer
Service layer
Infrastructure
layer
Scheduling
Monitoring
Workflow
Task
consistency
MapReduce/
Hadoop
Clustering/
Anomaly Detection
Coordination
Event
Discovery
Replication
Content-based routing
Self-organizing layer
Data center/Grid/Cloud
Content security
Load balancing
Messaging
Publish/Subscribe
FIGURE 10.1. The CometCloud architecture for autonomic cloudbursts.
10.2
COMETCLOUD ARCHITECTURE
277


routing and complex querying using partial keywords, wildcards, or ranges. It
also guarantees that all peer nodes with data elements that match a query/
message will be located. Nodes providing resources in the overlay have different
roles and, accordingly, different access privileges based on their credentials and
capabilities. This layer also provides replication and load balancing services,
and it handles dynamic joins and leaves of nodes as well as node failures. Every
node keeps the replica of its successor node’s state, and it reﬂects changes to this
replica whenever its successor notiﬁes it of changes. It also notiﬁes its
predecessor of any changes to its state. If a node fails, the predecessor node
merges the replica into its state and then makes a replica of its new successor. If
a new node joins, the joining node’s predecessor updates its replica to reﬂect the
joining node’s state, and the successor gives its state information to the joining
node. To maintain load balancing, load should be redistributed among the
nodes whenever a node joins and leaves.
The service layer provides a range of services to supports autonomics at the
programming and application level. This layer supports the Linda-like [5] tuple
space coordination model, and it provides a virtual shared-space abstraction as
well as associative access primitives. The basic coordination primitives are
listed below:
 out (ts, t): a nonblocking operation that inserts tuple t into space ts.
 in (ts, t’): a blocking operation that removes a tuple t matching template
t’ from the space ts and returns it.
 rd (ts, t’): a blocking operation that returns a tuple t matching template
t’ from the space ts. The tuple is not removed from the space.
The out is for inserting a tuple into the space, and in and rd are for reading a
tuple from the space are implemented. in removes the tuple after read, and
rd only reads the tuple. We support range query, hence “*” can be used for
searching all tuples. The above uniform operators do not distinguish between
local and remote spaces, and consequently the Comet is naturally suitable for
context-transparent applications. However, this abstraction does not maintain
geographic locality between peer nodes and may have a detrimental effect on
the efﬁciency of the applications imposing context-awareness, for example
mobile applications. These applications require that context locality be main-
tained in addition to content locality; that is, they impose requirements for
context-awareness. To address this issue, CometCloud supports dynamically
constructed transient spaces that have a speciﬁc scope deﬁnition (e.g., within
the same geographical region or the same physical subnet). The global space is
accessible to all peer nodes and acts as the default coordination platform.
Membership and authentication mechanisms are adopted to restrict access to
the transient spaces. The structure of the transient space is exactly the same as
the global space. An application can switch between spaces at runtime and can
simultaneously use multiple spaces. This layer also provides asynchronous
278
COMETCLOUD: AN AUTONOMIC CLOUD ENGINE
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>


(publish/subscribe) messaging and evening services. Finally, on-line clustering
services support autonomic management and enable self-monitoring and
control. Events describing the status or behavior of system components are
clustered, and the clustering is used to detect anomalous behaviors.
The programming layer provides the basic framework for application
development and management. It supports a range of paradigms including
the master/worker/BOT. Masters generate tasks and workers consume them.
Masters and workers can communicate via virtual shared space or using a
direct connection. Scheduling and monitoring of tasks are supported by the
application framework. The task consistency service handles lost tasks. Even
though replication is provided by the infrastructure layer, a task may be lost
due to network congestion. In this case, since there is no failure, infrastructure
level replication may not be able to handle it. This can be handled by the
master, for example, by waiting for the result of each task for a predeﬁned time
interval and, if it does not receive the result back, regenerating the lost task. If
the master receives duplicate results for a task, it selects the ﬁrst one and ignores
other subsequent results. Other supported paradigms include workﬂow-based
applications as well as Mapreduce [6] and Hadoop [7].
10.2.2
Comet Space
In Comet, a tuple is a simple XML string, where the ﬁrst element is the tuple’s
tag and is followed by an ordered list of elements containing the tuple’s ﬁelds.
Each ﬁeld has a name followed by its value. The tag, ﬁeld names, and values
must be actual data for a tuple and can contain wildcards (“*”) for a template
tuple. This lightweight format is ﬂexible enough to represent the information
for a wide range of applications and can support rich matching relationships
[8]. Further more, the cross-platform nature of XML makes this format
suitable for information exchange in distributed heterogeneous environments.
A tuple in Comet can be retrieved if it exactly or approximately matches a
template tuple. Exact matching requires the tag and ﬁeld names of the template
tuple to be speciﬁed without any wildcard, as in Linda. However, this
strict matching pattern must be relaxed in highly dynamic environments, since
applications (e.g., service discovery) may not know exact tuple structures.
Comet supports tuple retrievals with incomplete structure information using
approximate matching, which only requires the tag of the template tuple be
speciﬁed using a keyword or a partial keyword. Examples are shown in
Figure 10.2. In this ﬁgure, tuple (a) tagged “contact” has ﬁelds “name, phone,
email, dep” with values “Smith, 7324451000, smith@gmail.com, ece” and can
be retrieved using tuple template (b) or (c).
Comet adapts Squid information discovery scheme and employs the Hilbert
space-ﬁlling curve (SFC) [9] to map tuples from a semantic information space
to a linear node index. The semantic information space, consisting of based-10
numbers and English words, is deﬁned by application users. For example, a
computational storage resource may belong to the 3D storage space with
10.2
COMETCLOUD ARCHITECTURE
279


coordinates “space,” “bandwidth,” and “cost.” Each tuple is associated with
k keywords selected from its tag and ﬁeld names, which are the keys of a tuple.
For example, the keys of tuple (a) in Figure 10.2 can be “name, phone” in a 2D
student information space. Tuples are local in the information space if their
keys are lexicographically close, or if they have common keywords. The
selection of keys can be speciﬁed by the applications.
A Hilbert SFC is a locality preserving continuous mapping from a
k-dimensional (kD) space to a 1D space. It is locality preserving in that points
that are close on the curve are mapped from close points in the kD space. The
Hilbert curve readily extends to any number of dimensions. Its locality-
preserving property enables the tuple space to maintain content locality in
the index space. In Comet, the peer nodes form a one-dimensional overlay,
which is indexed by a Hilbert SFC. Applying the Hilbert mapping, the tuples
are mapped from the multi-dimensional information space to the linear peer
index space. As a result, Comet uses the Hilbert SFC constructs the distribute
hash table (DHT) for tuple distribution and lookup. If the keys of a tuple only
include complete keywords, the tuple is mapped as a point in the information
space and located on at most one node. If its keys consist of partial keywords,
wildcards, or ranges, the tuple identiﬁes a region in the information space. This
region is mapped to a collection of segments on the SFC and corresponds to a
set of points in the index space. Each node stores the keys that map to the
segment of the curve between itself and the predecessor node. For example, as
shown in Figure 10.3, ﬁve nodes (with id shown in solid circle) are indexed
using SFC from 0 to 63, the tuple deﬁned as the point (2, 1) is mapped to index
7 on the SFC and corresponds to node 13, and the tuple deﬁned as the region
(23, 15) is mapped to two segments on the SFC and corresponds to nodes
13 and 32.
10.3
AUTONOMIC BEHAVIOR OF COMETCLOUD
10.3.1
Autonomic Cloudbursting
The goal of autonomic cloudbursts is to seamlessly and securely integrate
private enterprise clouds and data centers with public utility clouds on-demand,
to provide the abstraction of resizable computing capacity. It enables the
<contact>
</contact>
(a)
(b)
(c)
<name> Smith </name>
<phone> 7324451000 </phone>
<email> smith@gmail.com </email>
<dep> ece </dep>
<contact>
</contact>
<name> Smith </name>
<phone> 7324451000 </phone>
<email> * </email>
<dep> * </dep>
<contact>
</contact>
<na*> Smith </na*>
<*>
<*>
<dep> ece </dep>
FIGURE 10.2. Example of tuples in CometCloud.
280
COMETCLOUD: AN AUTONOMIC CLOUD ENGINE


dynamic deployment of application components (which typically run on internal
organizational compute resources) onto a public cloud to address dynamic
workloads, spikes in demands, and other extreme requirements. Furthermore,
given the increasing application and infrastructure scales, as well as their
cooling, operation, and management costs, typical over-provisioning strategies
are no longer feasible. Autonomic cloudbursts can leverage utility clouds
to provide on-demand scale-out and scale-in capabilities based on a range
of metrics.
The overall approach for supporting autonomic cloudbursts in CometCloud
is presented in Figure 10.4. CometCloud considers three types of clouds based
on perceived security/trust and assigns capabilities accordingly. The ﬁrst is a
highly trusted, robust, and secure cloud, usually composed of trusted/secure
nodes within an enterprise, which is typically used to host masters and other
key (management, scheduling, monitoring) roles. These nodes are also used to
store states. In most applications, the privacy and integrity of critical data must
be maintained; as a result, tasks involving critical data should be limited to
cloud nodes that have required credentials. The second type of cloud is one
composed of nodes with such credentials—that is, the cloud of secure workers.
A privileged Comet space may span these two clouds and may contain critical
data, tasks, and other aspects of the application-logic/workﬂow. The ﬁnal type
of cloud consists of casual workers. These workers are not part of the space but
can access the space through the proxy and a request handler to obtain
(possibly encrypted) work units as long as they present required credentials.
Nodes can be added or deleted from any of these clouds by purpose. If the
space needs to be scale-up to store dynamically growing workload as well as
requires more computing capability, then autonomic cloudbursts target secure
worker to scale up. But only if more computing capability is required, then
unsecured workers are added.
13
7
32
40
5
1
1
2
0
0
13
32
(a)
40
51
63
0
0
13
32
(b)
40
51
63
2
3
28
31
11
13
0
0
6
32
40
51
51
63
63
FIGURE 10.3. Examples of mapping tuples from 2D information space to 1D index
space [1].
10.3
AUTONOMIC BEHAVIOR OF COMETCLOUD
281


Key motivations for autonomic cloudbursts include:
 Load Dynamics. Application workloads can vary signiﬁcantly. This
includes the number of application tasks as well the computational
requirements of a task. The computational environment must dynamically
grow (or shrink) in response to these dynamics while still maintaining
strict deadlines.
 Accuracy of the Analytics. The required accuracy of risk analytics depends
on a number of highly dynamic market parameters and has a direct impact
on the computational demand—for example the number of scenarios in
the Monte Carlo VaR formulation. The computational environment must
be able to dynamically adapt to satisfy the accuracy requirements while
still maintaining strict deadlines.
 Collaboration of Different Groups. Different groups can run the same
application with different dataset policies . Here, policy means user’s SLA
bounded by their condition such as time frame, budgets, and economic
models. As collaboration groups join or leave the work, the computa-
tional environment must grow or shrink to satisfy their SLA.
 Economics. Application tasks can have very heterogeneous and dynamic
priorities and must be assigned resources and scheduled accordingly.
Space sharing zone
4. Send a task
1. Request a task
2. Forward requests in Round-robin
5. Send results
directly to master
Datacenter
Grid
Clouds
3. Get a task
Generate
tasks
Unsecured Workers
Get tasks
Directly send results
Request Handler
Proxy
Management
agent
Computing
agent
Computing agent
Computing agent
Task 1
Task 2
Task 3
…
Scheduling
Comet
Comet
Monitoring
Robust/Secure
Masters
Secure Workers
FIGURE 10.4. Autonomic cloudbursts using CometCloud.
282
COMETCLOUD: AN AUTONOMIC CLOUD ENGINE


Budgets and economic models can be used to dynamically provision
computational resources based on the priority and criticality of the
application task. For example, application tasks can be assigned budgets
and can be assigned resources based on this budget. The computational
environment must be able to handle heterogeneous and dynamic provi-
sioning and scheduling requirements.
 Failures. Due to the strict deadlines involved, failures can be disastrous.
The computation must be able to manage failures without impacting
application quality of service, including deadlines and accuracies.
10.3.2
Autonomic Cloudbridging
Autonomic cloudbridging is meant to connect CometCloud and a virtual cloud
which consists of public cloud, data center, and grid by the dynamic needs of
the application. The clouds in the virtual cloud are heterogeneous and have
different types of resources and cost policies, besides, the performance of each
cloud can change over time by the number of current users. Hence, types of
used clouds, the number of nodes in each cloud, and resource types of nodes
should be decided according to the changing environment of the clouds and
application’s resource requirements.
Figure 10.5 shows an overview of the operation of the CometCloud-
based autonomic cloudbridging. The scheduling agent manages autonomic
Public
cloud
Datacenter
Grid
Virtually integrated working cloud
Cloud-Bridging
Scheduling agent
CometCloud
Policy
Research site 1
Research site 2
Research site n
FIGURE 10.5. Overview of the operation of autonomic cloudbridging.
10.3
AUTONOMIC BEHAVIOR OF COMETCLOUD
283


cloudbursts over the virtual cloud, and there can be one or more scheduling
agents. A scheduling agent is located at a robust/secure master site. If multiple
collaborating research groups work together and each group requires generat-
ing tasks with its own data and managing the virtual cloud by its own policy,
then it can have a separate scheduling agent in its master site. The requests for
tasks generated by the different sites are logged in the CometCloud virtual
shared space that spans master nodes at each of the sites. These tasks are then
consumed by workers, which may run on local computational nodes at the
site, a shared data center, and a grid or on a public cloud infrastructure.
A scheduling agent manages QoS constraints and autonomic cloudbursts of its
site according to the deﬁned policy. The workers can access the space using
appropriate credentials, access authorized tasks, and return results back to the
appropriate master indicated in the task itself.
A scheduling agent manages autonomic cloudbridging and guarantees QoS
within user policies. Autonomic cloudburst is represented by changing resource
provisioning not to violate deﬁned policy. We deﬁne three types of policies.
 Deadline-Based. When an application needs to be completed as soon as
possible, assuming an adequate budget, the maximum required workers
are allocated for the job.
 Budget-Based. When a budget is enforced on the application, the number
of workers allocated must ensure that the budget is not violated.
 Workload-Based. When the application workload changes, the number of
workers explicitly deﬁned by the application is allocated or released.
10.3.3
Other Autonomic Behaviors
Fault-Tolerance. Supporting fault-tolerance during runtime is critical to
keep the application’s deadline. We support fault-tolerance in two ways which
are in the infrastructure layer and in the programming layer. The replication
substrate in the infrastructure layer provides a mechanism to keep the same
state as that of its successor’s state, speciﬁcally coordination space and overlay
information. Figure 10.6 shows the overview of replication in the overlay.
Every node has a local space in the service layer and a replica space in the
infrastructure layer. When a tuple is inserted or extracted from the local space,
the node notiﬁes this update to its predecessor and the predecessor updates the
replica space. Hence every node keeps the same replica of its successor’s local
space. When a node fails, another node in the overlay detects the failure
and notiﬁes it to the predecessor of the failed node. Then the predecessor of
the failed node merges the replica space into the local space, and this makes
all the tuples from the failed node recovered. Also the predecessor node makes
a new replica for the local space of its new successor. We also support fault-
tolerance in the programming layer. Even though replica of each node is
maintained, some tasks can be lost during runtime because of network
284
COMETCLOUD: AN AUTONOMIC CLOUD ENGINE


congestion or task generation during failure. To address this issue, the master
checks the space periodically and regenerates lost tasks.
Load Balancing. In a cloud environment, executing application requests
on underlying grid resources consists of two key steps. The ﬁrst, which we
call VM Provisioning, consists of creating VM instances to host each
application request, matching the speciﬁc characteristics and requirements
of the request. The second step is mapping and scheduling these requests
onto distributed physical resources (Resource Provisioning). Most virtualized
data centers currently provide a set of general-purpose VM classes with
generic resource conﬁgurations, which quickly become insufﬁcient to sup-
port the highly varied and interleaved workloads. Furthermore, clients can
easily under- or overestimate their needs because of a lack of understanding
of application requirements due to application complexity and/or uncer-
tainty, and this often results in over-provisioning due to a tendency to be
conservative.
The decentralized clustering approach speciﬁcally addresses the distributed
nature of enterprise grids and clouds. The approach builds on a decentralized
messaging and data analysis infrastructure that provides monitoring and
density-based clustering capabilities. By clustering workload requests across
data center job queues, the characterization of different resource classes can be
accomplished to provide autonomic VM provisioning. This approach has
several advantages, including the capability of analyzing jobs across a dynamic
set of distributed queues, the nondependency on a priori knowledge of the
number of clustering classes, and the amenity for online application and timely
adaptation to changing workloads and resources. Furthermore, the robust
nature of the approach allows it to handle changes (joins/leaves) in the job
queue servers as well as their failures while maximizing the quality and
efﬁciency of the clustering.
Master 1
Master 2
Worker 6
Worker 5
Worker 1
Worker 2
Worker 4
Worker 3
Local space
Replica space
CometCloud
FIGURE 10.6. Replication overview in the CometCloud overlay.
10.3
AUTONOMIC BEHAVIOR OF COMETCLOUD
285


10.4
OVERVIEW OF COMETCLOUD-BASED APPLICATIONS
In this section, we describe two types of applications which are VaR for
measuring the risk level of a ﬁrm’s holdings and image registration for medical
informatics. A VaR calculation should be completed within the limited time,
and the computational requirements for the calculation can change signiﬁ-
cantly. Besides, the requirement for additional computation happens irregu-
larly. Hence, for VaR we will focus on how autonomic cloudbursts work for
dynamically changing workloads. Image registration is the process to deter-
mine the linear/nonlinear mapping T between two images of the same object or
similar objects that are acquired at different time, or from different perspec-
tives. Besides, because a set of image registration methods are used by different
(geographically distributed) research groups to process their locally stored
data, jobs can be injected from multiple sites. Another distinguished difference
between two applications is that data size of image registration is much larger
than that of VaR. For a 3D image, the image size is usually a few tens of
megabytes. Hence, image data should be separated from its task tuple, and
instead it locates on a separate storage server and its location is indicated in the
task tuple. For image registration, because it usually needs to be completed as
soon as possible within budget limit, we will focus on how CometCloud works
using budget-based policy.
10.4.1
Value at Risk (VaR)
Monte Carlo VaR is a very powerful measure used to judge the risk of
portfolios of ﬁnancial instruments. The complexity of the VaR calculation
stems from simulating portfolio returns. To accomplish this, Monte Carlo
methods are used to “guess” what the future state of the world may look like.
Guessing a large number of times allows the technique to encompass the
complex distributions and the correlations of different factors that drive
portfolio returns into a discreet set of scenarios. Each of these Monte Carlo
scenarios contains a state of the world comprehensive enough to value all
instruments in the portfolio, thereby allowing us to calculate a return for the
portfolio under that scenario.
The process of generating Monte Carlo scenarios begins by selecting
primitive instruments or invariants. To simplify simulation modeling, invariants
are chosen such that they exhibit returns that can be modeled using a stationary
normal probability distribution [11]. In practice these invariants are returns on
stock prices, interest rates, foreign exchange rates, and so on. The universe of
invariants must be selected such that portfolio returns are driven only by
changes to the invariants.
To properly capture the nonlinear pricing of portfolios containing options,
we use Monte Carlo techniques to simulate many realizations of the invariants.
Each realization is referred to as a scenario. Under each of these scenarios, each
option is priced using the invariants and the portfolio is valued. As outlined
286
COMETCLOUD: AN AUTONOMIC CLOUD ENGINE


above, the portfolio returns for scenarios are ordered from worst loss to best
gain, and a VaR number is calculated.
10.4.2
Image Registration
Nonlinear image registration [12] is the computationally expensive process to
determine the mapping T between two images of the same object or similar
objects acquired at different time, in different position or with different
acquisition parameters or modalities. Both intensity/area based and landmark
based methods have been reported to be effective in handling various registra-
tion tasks. Hybrid methods which integrate both techniques have demonstrated
advantages in the literature [1315].
Alternative landmark point detection and matching method are developed
as a part of hybrid image registration algorithm for both 2D and 3D images
[16]. The algorithm starts with automatic detection of a set of landmarks in
both ﬁxed and moving images, followed by a coarse to ﬁne estimation of the
nonlinear mapping using the landmarks. Intensity template matching is further
used to obtain the point correspondence between landmarks in the ﬁxed and
moving images. Because there is a large portion of outliers in the initial
landmark correspondence, a robust estimator, RANSAC [17], is applied to
reject outliers. The ﬁnal reﬁned inliers are used to robustly estimate a Thin
Spline Transform (TPS) [18] to complete the ﬁnal nonlinear registration.
10.5
IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION
In this section, we evaluate basic CometCloud operations ﬁrst, and then
compare application runtime varying the number of nodes after describing
how the applications were implemented using CometCloud. Then we evaluate
VaR using workload-based policy and Image registration using budget-based
policy. Also we evaluate CometCloud with/without a scheduling agent. For
deadline-based policy that doesn’t have a budget limit, because it allocates as
many workers as possible, we applied it just to compare results with and
without scheduling agent for budget-based policy.
10.5.1
Evaluation of CometCloud
Basic CometCloud Operations. In this experiment we evaluated the costs of
basic tuple insertion and exact retrieval operations on the Rutgers cloud. Each
machine was a peer node in the CometCloud overlay and the machines formed
a single CometCloud peer group. The size of the tuple in the experiment was
ﬁxed at 200 bytes. Aing-pong-like process was used in the experiment, in
which an application process inserted a tuple into the space using the out
operator, read the same tuple using the rd operator, and deleted it using the
in operator. In the experiment, the out and exact matching in/rd operators used
10.5
IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION
287


a three-dimensional information space. For an out operation, the measured
time corresponded to the time interval between when the tuple was posted into
the space and when the response from the destination was received. For an in or
rd operation, the measured time was the time interval between when the
template was posted into the space and when the matching tuple was returned
to the application, assuming that a matching tuple existed in the space. This
time included the time for routing the template, matching tuples in the
repository, and returning the matching tuple. The average performances were
measured for different system sizes.
Figure 10.7a plots the average measured performance and shows that the
system scales well with increasing number of peer nodes. When the number
of peer nodes increases 32 times (i.e., from 2 to 64), the average round-trip
time increases only about 1.5 times, due to the logarithmic complexity of the
routing algorithm of the Chord overlay. rd and in operations exhibit similar
(a) 
(b) 
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
140
120
100
80
20
40
60
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
Number of tuples (average 110 bytes each)
in a tuple
rd a tuple
Average time (ms)
Execution Time (ms)
2 4
8
16
24
32
40
48
56
64
Number of Nodes
out
rd
in
FIGURE 10.7. Evaluation of CometCloud primitives on the Rutgers cloud. (a) Average
time for out, in, and rd operators for increasing system sizes. (b) Average time for in and
rd operations with increasing number of tuples. System size ﬁxed at 4 nodes.
288
COMETCLOUD: AN AUTONOMIC CLOUD ENGINE


performance, as shown in Figure 10.7a. To further study the in/rd operator, the
average time for in/rd was measured using an increasing number of tuples.
Figure 10.7b shows that the performance of in/rd is largely independent of the
number of tuples in the system: The average time is approximately 105 ms as
the number of tuples is increased from 2000 to 12,000.
Overlay Join Overhead. To share the Comet space, a node should join the
CometCloud overlay and each node should manage a ﬁnger table to keep track
of changing neighbors. When a node joins the overlay, it ﬁrst connects to a
predeﬁned bootstrap node and sends its information such as IP address to the
bootstrap. Then the bootstrap node makes a ﬁnger table for the node and sends
it back to the node. Hence, the more nodes join the overlay at the same time,
the larger join overhead happens. Table 10.1 shows the join overhead varying
the number of joining nodes at the same time. We evaluated it on Amazon EC2,
and the ﬁgure shows that the join overhead is less than 4 seconds even when 100
nodes join the overlay at the same time.
10.5.2
Application Runtime
All tasks generated by the master are inserted into the Comet space and each
should be described by XML tags that are described differently for the purpose
of an application. Data to be computed can be included in a task or outside of
the task such as in a ﬁle server. To show each case, let VaR tasks include data
inside the tuple and image registration tasks include data outside of the tuple
because image data are relatively larger than VaR data. A typical out task for
VaR is described as shown below.
, VarAppTask .
, TaskId . taskid , /TaskId .
, DataBlock . data_blocks , /DataBlock .
, MasterNetName . master_name , /MasterNetName .
, /VarAppTask .
In image registration, each worker processes a whole image, hence the
number of images to be processed is the number of tasks. Besides, because
TABLE 10.1. The Overlay Join Overhead on Amazon EC2
Number of Nodes
Time (msec)
10
353
20
633
40
1405
80
3051
100
3604
10.5
IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION
289


the image size is too large to be conveyed on a task, when the master generates
tasks, it just includes the data location for the task as a tag. After a worker
takes a task from the Comet space, it connects to the data location and gets
data. A typical out task for image registration is described as shown below.
, ImageRegAppTask .
, TaskId . taskid , /TaskId .
, ImageLocation . image_location , /ImageLocation .
, MasterNetName . master_name , /MasterNetName .
, /ImageRegAppTask .
Figure 10.8 shows the total application runtime of CometCloud-based (a)
VaR and (b) image registration on Amazon EC2 for different number of
scenarios. In this experiment, we ran a master on the Rutgers cloud and up to
80 workers on EC2 instances. Each worker ran on a different instance. We
assumed that all workers were unsecured and did not share the Comet space.
As shown in Figure 10.8a, and as expected, the application runtime of VaR
decreases as the number of EC2 workers increases up to some points. However,
when the number of workers is larger than some values, the application runtime
increases (see 40 and 80 workers). This is because of the communication
overhead that workers ask tasks to the proxy. Note that the proxy is the access
point for unsecured workers even though a request handler sends a task to the
worker after the proxy forwards the request to the request handler. If the
computed data size is large and it needs more time to be completed, then
workers will have less access the proxy and the communication overhead of the
proxy will decrease. Figure 10.8b shows the performance improvement of
image registration when the number of workers increases. The same as in VaR,
when the number of workers increases, the application runtime decreases. In
this application, one image takes around 1 minute to be completed, hence the
communication overhead does not appear in the graph.
200
180
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
1
5
10
20
40
80
Number of workers
3000 scenarios
1000 scenarios
Execution time (sec)
7000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
1
5
10
20
40
80
Number of workers
100 Images
Execution time (sec)
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 10.8. Evaluation of CometCloud-based applications on Amazon EC2.
(a) VaR. (b) Image registration.
290
COMETCLOUD: AN AUTONOMIC CLOUD ENGINE


10.5.3
Autonomic Cloudbursts Behaviors
VaR Using Workload-Based Policy. In this experiment, autonomic cloud-
burst is represented by the number of changing workers. When the application
workload increases (or decreases), a predeﬁned number of workers are added
(or released), based on the application workload. Speciﬁcally, we deﬁned
workload-speciﬁc and workload-bounded policies. In workload-speciﬁc, a user
can specify the workload that nodes are allocated or released. In workload-
bounded, whenever the workload increases by more than a speciﬁed threshold,
a predeﬁned number of workers is added. Similarly, if the workload decreases
by more than the speciﬁed threshold, the predeﬁned number of workers is
released.
Figure 10.9 demonstrates autonomic cloudbursts in CometCloud based on
two of the above polices—that is, workload-speciﬁc and workload-bounded.
The ﬁgure plots the changes in the number of worker as the workload changes.
For the workload-speciﬁc policy, the initial workload is set to 1000 simulations
and the initial number of workers is set to 8. The workload is then increased or
decreased by 200 simulations at a time, and the number of worked added
or released set to 3. For workload-bounded policy, the number of workers is
initially 8 and the workload is 1000 simulations. In this experiment, the
workload is increased by 200 and decreased by 400 simulations, and 3 workers
are added or released at a time. The plots in Figure 10.9 clearly demonstrate the
cloudburst behavior. Note that the policy used as well as the thresholds can be
changed on-the-ﬂy.
Image Registration Using Budget-Based Policy. The virtual cloud envi-
ronment used for the experiments consisted of two research sites located at
Rutgers University and the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey:
one public cloud (i.e., Amazon Web Service (AWS) EC2 [10]) and one private data
center at Rutgers (i.e., TW). The two research sites hosted their own image servers
and job queues, and workers running on EC2 or TW access these image servers to
get the image described in the task assigned to them (see Figure 10.5). Each image
1800
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
1800
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
0
Time (ms)
235000
0
Time (ms)
425000
Number of workers
Number of workers
Workload (number of 
simulations)
Workload 
(number of  simulations)
Number of workers
Workload
(a)
(b)
Number of workers
Workload
FIGURE 10.9. Policy-based autonomic cloudburst using CometCloud. (a) Workload-
speciﬁc policy. (b) Workload-bounded policy.
10.5
IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION
291


server has 250 images resulting in a total of 500 tasks. Each image is two-
dimensional, and its size is between 17 kB and 65 kB. The costs associated with
running tasks on EC2 and TW nodes were computed based on costing models
presented in references 10 and 9, respectively. On EC2, we used standard small
instances with a computing cost of $0.10/hour, data transfer costs of $0.10/GB for
inward transfers, and $0.17/GB for outward transfers. Because the computing
cost is charged by hourly base, users should pay for the full hour even though they
use just a few minutes. However, in this experiment, we calculated the cost by
seconds because the total runtime is less than an hour.
Costs for the TW data center included hardware investment, software,
electricity, and so on, and were estimated based on the discussion in [9], which
says that a data center costs $120K/life cycle per rack and has a life cycle of 10
years. Hence, we set the cost for TW to $1.37/hour per rack. In the
experiments we set the maximum number of available nodes to 25 for TW
and 100 for EC2. Note that TW nodes outperform EC2 nodes, but are more
expensive. We used budget-based policy for scheduling where the scheduling
agent tries to complete tasks as soon as possible without violating the budget.
We set the maximum available budget in the experiments to $3 to complete all
tasks. The motivation for this choice is as follows. If the available budget was
sufﬁciently high, then all the available nodes on TW will be allocated, and
tasks would be assigned until the all the tasks were completed. If the budget is
too small, the scheduling agent would not be able to complete all the tasks
within the budget. Hence, we set the budget to an arbitrary value in between.
Finally, the monitoring component of the scheduling agent evaluated the
performance every 1 minute.
Evaluation of CometCloud-Based Image Registration Application Enabled
Scheduling Agent. The results from the experiments are plotted in Figure 10.10.
Note that since the scheduling interval is 1 min, the x axis corresponds to both
time (in minutes) and the scheduling iteration number. Initially, the CometCloud
scheduling agent does not know the cost of completing a task. Hence, it
initially allocated 10 nodes each from TW and EC2. Figure 10.10a shows the
scheduled number of workers on TW and EC2 and Figure 10.10b shows costs
per task for TW and EC2. In the beginning, since the budget is sufﬁcient, the
scheduling agent tries to allocate TW nodes even though they cost more than
EC2 node. In the second scheduling iteration, there are 460 tasks still remaining,
and the agent attempts to allocate 180 TW nodes and 280 EC2 nodes to ﬁnish all
tasks as soon as possible within the available budget. If TW and EC2 could
provide the requested nodes, all the tasks would be completed by next iteration.
However, since the maximum available number of TW nodes is only 25, it
allocates these 25 TW nodes and estimates that a completion time of 7.2
iterations. The agent then decides on the number of EC2 workers to be used
based on the estimated rounds.
In case of the EC2, it takes around 1 minute to launch (from the start of
virtual machine to ready state for consuming tasks); as a result, by the 4th
292
COMETCLOUD: AN AUTONOMIC CLOUD ENGINE


120
100
80
60
40
20
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13
Number of workers
Time (min)
EC2 schedule
TW schedule
(a)
Used budget
Budget limit
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.0
0.5
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13
Used budget ($)
Time (min)
(c)
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.00
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13
Cost per task ($)
Time (min)
EC2 cost
TW cost
(b)
FIGURE 10.10. Experimental evaluation of medical image registration using Comet-
Cloud. Results were obtained using the scheduling agent. (a) Scheduled number of
nodes. (b) Calculated cost per task. (c) Cumulative budget usage over time.
10.5
IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION
293


iteration the cost per task for EC2 increases. At this point, the scheduling agent
decides to decrease the number of TW nodes, which are expensive, and instead
it decides to increase the number of EC2 nodes using the available budget. By
the 9th iteration, 22 tasks are still remaining. The scheduling agent now decides
to release 78 EC2 nodes because they will not have jobs to execute. The reason
why the remaining jobs have not completed at the 10th iteration (i.e., 10
minutes) even though 22 nodes are still working is that the performance of EC2
decreased for some reason in our experiments. Figure 10.10c shows the used
budget over time. It shows that all the tasks were completed within the budget
and took around 13 minutes.
Comparison of Execution Time and Used Budget with/without Scheduling
Agent. Figure 10.11 shows a comparison of execution time and used budget
with/without the CometCloud scheduling agent. In the case where only EC2
nodes are used, when the number of EC2 nodes is decreased from 100 to 50 and
25, the execution time increases and the used budget decreases as shown in
Figures 10.11a and 10.11b. Comparing the same number of EC2 and TW nodes
(25 EC2 and 25 TW), the execution time for 25 TW nodes is approximately half
that for 25 EC2 nodes; however, the cost for 25 TW nodes is signiﬁcantly more
than that for 25 EC2 nodes. When the CometCloud autonomic scheduling
agent is used, the execution time is close to that obtained using 25 TW nodes,
but the cost is much smaller and the tasks are completed within the budget. An
interesting observation from the plots is that if you don’t have any limits on the
number of EC2 nodes used, then a better solution is to allocate as many EC2
nodes as you can. However, if you only have a limited number of nodes to use
and want to be guaranteed that your job is completed in limited budget, then
the autonomic scheduling approach achieves an acceptable trade-off. Note that
launching EC2 nodes at runtime impacts application performance because it
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Execution time (min)
100 EC2
50 EC2
25 EC2
25 TW
Scheduled
8.0
7.0
6.0
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
Used budget ($)
100 EC2
50 EC2
25 EC2
25 TW
Scheduled
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 10.11. Experimental evaluation of medical image registration using Comet-
Cloud - Comparison of performance and costs with/without autonomic scheduling.
(a) Execution time varying the number of nodes of EC2 and TW. (b) Used budget over
time varying the number of nodes for EC2 and TW.
294
COMETCLOUD: AN AUTONOMIC CLOUD ENGINE


takes about a minute: A node launched at time t minutes only starts working
at time t 1 1 minutes. Since different cloud service will have different perfor-
mance and cost proﬁles, the scheduling agent will have to use historical data
and more complex models to compute schedules, as we extend CometCloud to
include other service providers.
10.6
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
In this chapter, we investigated autonomic cloudbursting and autonomic
cloudbridging to support real-world applications such as VaR and a medical
image registration application using the CometCloud framework. CometCloud
enables a virtual computational cloud that integrates local computational
environments (data centers) and public cloud services on-the-ﬂy and provides
a scheduling agent to manage cloudbridging. CometCloud supports on-line risk
analytics that should be time-critically completed and has dynamically chan-
ging workload and medical informatics which has large data and receives
requests from different distributed researcher groups with varied computa-
tional requirements and QoS constraints. The policy-driven scheduling agent
uses the QoS constraints along with performance history and the state of the
resources to determine the appropriate size and mix of the public and private
cloud resources that should be allocated to a speciﬁc request. These applica-
tions were deployed on private clouds at Rutgers University, the Cancer
Institute of New Jersey, and a public cloud at Amazon EC2. The results
demonstrated the effectiveness of autonomic cloudbursts as well as policy-
based autonomic scheduling and showed the feasibility to run similar types of
applications using CometCloud.
We are supporting high-level application models such as Hadoop/MapRe-
duce and workﬂow abstraction. Also, we are deploying more applications such
as Ensemble Kalman Filter, partial differential equation (PDE), pharmaceu-
tical informatics, Mandelbrot, and replica exchange on Amazon EC2. To prove
the feasibility of autonomic cloudbursting and autonomic cloudbridging for
more heterogeneous clouds, we plan to extend the virtual cloud such as
TeraGrid and Eucalyptus.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Zhen Li, Shivangi Chaudhari, and Lin Yang
for their contributions to this work. The research presented in this chapter
was supported in part by National Science Foundation via grants numbers
IIP 0758566, CCF-0833039, DMS-0835436, CNS 0426354, IIS 0430826, and
CNS 0723594, by Department of Energy via the grant number DE-FG02-
06ER54857, by The Extreme Scale Systems Center at ORNL and the Depart-
ment of Defense, and by an IBM Faculty Award and was conducted as part of
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
295


the NSF Center for Autonomic Computing at Rutgers University. Experiments
on the EC2 were supported by a grant from Amazon Web Services.
REFERENCES
1.
Z. Li and M. Parashar, A computational infrastructure for grid-based asynchro-
nous parallel applications, in Proceedings of the 16th International Symposium on
High Performance Distributed Computing. ACM, New York, 2007, pp. 229230.
2.
C. Schmidt and M. Parashar, Squid: Enabling search in dht-based systems, Journal
of Parallel and Distributed Computing, 68(7):962975, 2008.
3.
I. Stoica, R. Morris, D. Karger, M. F. Kaashoek, and H. Balakrishnan, Chord: A
scalable peer-to-peer lookup service for internet applications, in Proceedings of the
2001 Conference on Applications, Technologies, Architectures, and Protocols for
Computer Communications, 2001, pp. 149160.
4.
C. Schmidt and M. Parashar, Enabling ﬂexible queries with guarantees in p2p
systems, IEEE Internet Computing, 8(3):1926, 2004.
5.
N. Carriero and D. Gelernter, Linda in context, Communications of the ACM,
32(4):444458, 1989.
6.
J. Dean and S. Ghemawat, Mapreduce: Simpliﬁed data processing on large
clusters, Communications of the ACM, 51(1):107113, 2008.
7.
Hadoop, http://hadoop.apache.org/core/.
8.
R. Tolksdorf and D. Glaubitz, Coordinating web-based systems with documents in
xmlspaces, in Proceedings of the Sixth IFCIS International Conference on Co-
operative Information Systems, Springer-Verlag, New York, 2001, pp. 356370.
9.
B. Moon, H. V. Jagadish, C. Faloutsos, and J. H. Saltz, Analysis of the clustering
properties of the hilbert space-ﬁlling curve, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and
Data Engineering, 13(1):124141, 2001.
10.
Amazon elastic compute cloud. http://aws.amazon.com/ec2/.
11.
A. Meucci, Risk and Asset Allocation, Springer-Verlag, New York, 2005.
12.
T. Vercauteren, X. Pennec, A. Perchant, and N. Ayache, Symmetric logdomain
diffeomorphic registration: A demons-based approach, in Proceedings of the
International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted
Intervention, Vol. 5241, 2008, pp. 754761.
13.
C. DeLorenzo, X. Papademetris, K. Wu, K. P. Vives, D. Spencer, and J. S.
Duncan, Nonrigid 3D brain registration using intensity/feature information, in
Proceedings of the International Conference on Medical Image Computing and
Computer Assisted Intervention, Vol. 4190, 2004, pp. 16113349.
14.
B. Fischer and J. Modersitzki, Combination of automatic and landmark based
registration: The best of both worlds, SPIE Medical Imaging, 2003, pp. 10371047.
15.
A. Azar, C. Xu, X. Pennec, and N. Ayache, An interactive hybrid nonrigid
registration framework for 3D medical images, in Proceedings of the International
Symposium on Biomedical Imaging, 2006, pp. 824827.
16.
L. Yang, L. Gong, H. Zhang, J. L. Nosher, and D. J. Foran, A method for parallel
platform based acceleration of landmark based image registration, in Proceedings
of the European Conference on Parallel Computing, Netherlands, 2009.
296
COMETCLOUD: AN AUTONOMIC CLOUD ENGINE


17.
M. A. Fischler and R. C. Bolles, Random sample consensus: A paradigm for model
ﬁtting with applications to image analysis and automated cartography, Commu-
nications of the ACM, 24:381395, 1981.
18.
H. Chui and A. Rangarajan, A new point matching algorithm for nonrigid
registration, Computer Vision and Image Understanding, 89(2):114141, 2003.
19.
Apc, http://apcmedia.com/salestools/CMRP-5T9PQG R3 EN.pdf
20.
D. Nurmi, R. Wolski, C. Grzegorczyk, G. Obertelli, S. Soman, L. Youseff, and D.
Zagorodnov, The Eucalyptus open-source cloudcomputing system, in Proceedings
of the 9th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster Computing and the Grid
(CCGrid 2009), 2009, pp. 124-131.
REFERENCES
297


CHAPTER 11
T-SYSTEMS’ CLOUD-BASED
SOLUTIONS FOR BUSINESS
APPLICATIONS
MICHAEL PAULY
11.1
INTRODUCTION
Thanks to the widespread acceptance of the Internet, cloud computing has
become ﬁrmly established in the private sphere. And now enterprises appear
poised to adopt this technology on a large scale. This is a further example of the
consumerization of IT—with technology in the consumer world driving
developments in the business world.
T-Systems is one of Europe’s largest ICT service providers. It offers a wide
range of IT, telecommunications, and integrated ICT services, and it boasts
extensive experience in managing complex outsourcing projects. The company
offers hosting and other services from its 75 data centers with over 50,000
servers and over 125.000 MIPS—in Europe, Asia, the Americas and Africa. In
addition, it is a major provider of desktop and network services. T-Systems
approaches cloud computing from the viewpoint of an organization with an
established portfolio of dynamic, scalable services delivered via networks. The
service provider creates end-to-end offerings that integrate all elements, in
collaboration with established hardware and software vendors.
Cloud computing is an opportunity for T-Systems to leverage its established
concept for services delivered from data centers. Cloud computing entails the
industrialization of IT production, enabling customers to use services and
resources on demand. Business, however, cannot adopt wholesale the principles
of cloud computing from the consumer world. Instead, T-Systems aligns cloud
computing with the speciﬁc requirements of large enterprises. This can mean
Cloud Computing: Principles and Paradigms,
Edited by Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg and
Andrzej Goscinski
Copyright r 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
299


rejecting cloud principles where these conﬂict with statutory requirements or
security imperatives [1].
11.2
WHAT ENTERPRISES DEMAND OF CLOUD COMPUTING
Whether operated in-house or by an external provider, ICT is driven by two
key factors (Figure 11.1): cost pressure and market pressure. Both of these call
for increases in productivity.
11.2.1
Changing Markets
Today’s markets are increasingly dynamic. Products and skills rapidly become
obsolete, eroding competitiveness. So incumbents need to ﬁnd and implement
new ideas at an ever faster pace. Also, new businesses are entering the market
more rapidly, and they are extending their portfolios by forging alliances with
other players.
The Internet offers the opportunity to implement new business models and
integrate new stakeholders into processes—at speeds that were previously
unimaginable. One excellent example is the automotive industry, which has
brought together OEMs, suppliers, dealers, and customers on shared Internet
Cost pressure
Market
pressure
Increased
productivity
• Convert fixed costs
   into variable costs 
• Reduce (IT)
   administration costs 
• Increase liquidity
• Speed and ease of
    use 
• Collaboration
• New technologies
• Meet new
   competition
• New markets
   (expansion)
• New business
   models
• Consolidation
• Speed
• Flexibility
• Scalability
• Security
• Cost benefits
• Transparency
Drivers
Requirements
Solution
Cloud computing
Demands on ICT
• Availability
• Quality of service
FIGURE 11.1. The route to cloud computing—industrialization of IT.
300
T-SYSTEMS’ CLOUD-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR BUSINESS APPLICATIONS


platforms. In line with Web 2.0 principles, customers can inﬂuence vehicle
development. This and other examples demonstrate the revolutionary potential
of cloud computing.
Markets and market participants are changing at an unprecedented pace.
New competitors are constantly entering the ring, and established enterprises
are undergoing transformation. Value grids are increasing the number of joint
ventures. This often leads to acquisitions, mergers, and divestments and gives
rise to new enterprises and business models.
At the same time, markets have become more ﬂexible. This not only enables
enterprises to move into new lines of business with greater ease and speed, it
also changes prevailing market conditions. Customers respond faster to
changes in the supply of goods and services, market shares shift, some
supply-and-demand relationships vanish completely, and individual markets
shrink or disappear. These phenomena have, for instance, radically trans-
formed the retail industry in recent years.
Against this background, companies not only need to scale up, but also to
scale down—for example, if demand falls, or if they take a strategic decision to
abandon a line of business or territory.
There is a need to respond to all these factors. Pressure is rising not only on
management, but also on ICT—because business processes supported by ICT
have to be rapidly modiﬁed to meet new imperatives. While the focus was on
saving money, ICT outsourcing was the obvious answer. But traditional
outsourcing cannot deliver the speed and agility markets now demand.
Today’s legacy ICT infrastructures have evolved over many years and lack
ﬂexibility. Moreover, few organizations can afford the capital investment
required to keep their technology up to date. At the same time, ICT resources
need to be quickly scaled up and down in line with changing requirements.
Intriguingly, ICT triggered this trend toward faster, more ﬂexible businesses.
Now, this has come full circle—with more dynamic businesses calling for more
dynamic ICT.
11.2.2
Increased Productivity
Today, enterprise ICT and business processes are closely interwoven—so that
the line between processes and technology is becoming blurred. As a result, ICT
is now a critical success factor: It signiﬁcantly inﬂuences competitiveness and
value creation. The impact of ﬂuctuations in the quality of ICT services (for
example, availability) is felt immediately. The nonavailability of ERP (enter-
prise resource planning) and e-mail systems brings processes grinding to a halt
and makes collaboration impossible. And the resulting time-to-market delays
mean serious competitive disadvantage.
The demands are also increasing when it comes to teamwork and collabora-
tion. Solutions not only have to deliver speed plus ease of use, they also have
to support simultaneous work on the same documents, conduct team meet-
ings with participants on different continents, and provide the necessary
11.2
WHAT ENTERPRISES DEMAND OF CLOUD COMPUTING
301


infrastructure (anywhere access, avoidance of data redundancy, etc.). That is
no easy task in today’s environment.
11.2.3
Rising Cost Pressure
Globalization opens up new markets. But it also means exposure to greater
competition. Prices for goods and services are falling at the same time that the
costs for power, staff, and raw materials are rising. The ﬁnancial crisis has
aggravated the situation, with market growth slowing or stagnating. To master
these challenges, companies have to improve their cost structures.
This generally means cutting costs. Staff downsizing and the divestment of
loss-making units are often the preferred options. However, replacing ﬁxed
costs with variable costs can also contribute signiﬁcantly—without resorting to
sensitive measures such as layoffs. This improves liquidity. Money otherwise
tied up in capital investment can be put to good use elsewhere. In extreme cases,
this can even avert insolvency; most commonly, the resulting liquidity is used to
increase equity, mitigating ﬁnancial risk.
A radical increase in the ﬂexibility of the ICT landscapes can deliver
signiﬁcant long-term beneﬁts. It fundamentally transforms cost structures,
since ICT-related expenses are a signiﬁcant cost factor. ICT spending (for
example, administration and energy costs) offers considerable potential for
savings.
However, those savings must not be allowed to impact the quality of ICT
services. The goal must be standardized, automated (i.e., industrialized), and
streamlined ICT production. The high quality of the resulting ICT services
increases efﬁciency and effectiveness and enhances reliability, thereby cutting
costs and improving competitiveness.
In other words, today’s businesses expect a great deal from their ICT. It not
only has to open up market opportunities, it also has to be secure and reliable.
This means that ICT and associated services have to deliver speed, ﬂexibility,
scalability, security, cost-effectiveness, and transparency. And cloud computing
promises to meet all these expectations.
11.3
DYNAMIC ICT SERVICES
Expectations differ considerably, depending on company size and industry. For
example, a pharmaceuticals multinational, a traditional midsize retailer, and a
startup will all have very different ICT requirements, particularly when it comes
to certiﬁcation.
However, they all face the same challenges: the need to penetrate new
markets, to launch new services, to supply sales models, or to make joint
offerings with partners. This is where dynamic ICT delivers tangible beneﬁts.
At ﬁrst sight, it may seem paradoxical to claim that standardization can
create ﬂexibility. But industrialized production within the scope of outsourcing
302
T-SYSTEMS’ CLOUD-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR BUSINESS APPLICATIONS


is not restrictive. In fact, quite the opposite: Industrialization provides the basis
for ICT services that are dynamic, fast, in line with real-world requirements,
and secure and reliable. ICT services of this kind are the foundation of a cloud
that provides services on demand. Only by industrializing ICT is it possible to
create the conditions for the ﬂexible delivery of individual ICT services, and for
combining them in advantageous ways.
Standardized production also enables ICT providers to achieve greater
economies of scale. However, this calls for highly effective ICT management—
on the part of both the service provider and the customer. Proven concepts and
methodologies from the manufacturing industry can be applied to ICT. The
following are particularly worth mentioning:
 Standardization
 Automation
 Modularization
 Integrated creation of ICT services
11.3.1
Steps Toward Industrialized ICT
Standardization and automation greatly reduce production costs and increase
the efﬁciency and ﬂexibility of ICT. However, they come at a price: There is
less scope for customization. This is something that everyone with a personal
e-mail account from one of the big providers has encountered. Services of
this kind fulﬁll their purpose, but offer only very stripped-down functionality
and are usually free of charge. More sophisticated e-mail solutions are
available only via fee-based “premium” offerings. In other words, lower
costs and simpler processes go hand in hand. And this is why companies have
to streamline their processes. When it comes to standardization, ICT service
providers focus on the technology while businesses focus on services and
processes.
The growing popularity of standard software reﬂects this. In the ERP space,
this trend has been evident for years, with homegrown solutions being replaced
by standard packages. A similar shift can be observed in CRM, with a growing
number of slimmed-down offerings available as software as a service (SaaS)
from the cloud.
At the same time, standards-based modularization enables new forms of
customization. However, greater customization of the solutions delivered to
businesses reduces efﬁciency for providers, thereby pushing up prices. In the
world of ICT, there is a clear conﬂict between customization and cost.
Standardization has the appeal (particularly for service providers) of cutting
ICT production costs. This means that ICT providers have to take these
arguments in favor of standardization seriously and adapt their production
accordingly. For enterprise customers, security and compliance are also key
considerations, alongside transparent service delivery, data storage, and
11.3
DYNAMIC ICT SERVICES
303


transfer. These parameters must be clearly deﬁned in contracts and service-level
agreements (SLAs).
11.3.2
Customization through Modularization
Modular production enables ICT to be tailored to customers’ speciﬁc require-
ments—in conjunction with standardization. Modularization allows providers
to pool resources as the basis for delivering the relevant services [2].
Modularization is essentially a set of standardized individual modules that
can be combined. The resulting combinations give rise to sophisticated
applications tailored to the needs of the speciﬁc company. Standardized
interfaces (e.g., APIs) between individual modules play a pivotal role. And
one of the great strengths of modules is their reusability.
The more easily and ﬂexibly such modules can be combined, the greater the
potential beneﬁts. Providers have to keep the number of modules as low as
possible while meeting as many of their customers’ requirements as possible,
and this is far from easy.
One example of modularization in a different context is combining Web
services from various sources (mashups). In the cloud era, providers of modules
of this kind claim that they enable users with no programming skills to support
processes with ICT. However, experience shows that where such skills are
lacking, a specialist integrator is generally called in as an implementation
partner.
The beneﬁt of modular services is that they can be ﬂexibly combined,
allowing standard offerings to be tailored to speciﬁc requirements. At the same
time, they prevent customized solutions from straying too far from the
standard, which would signiﬁcantly drive up the costs of later modiﬁcations.
11.3.3
Integrated Creation of ICT Services
Each of the elements outlined above can have signiﬁcant advantages. But only
an integrated approach to creating ICT services—combining standardization,
automation and modularization—can deliver the entire range of beneﬁts. This
gives the provider standardized, automated production processes and enables
the desired services to be delivered to the customer quickly and ﬂexibly.
In the context of outsourcing, this form of industrialization yields its full
potential when providers and users have a close, two-way relationship with
corresponding connectivity. This enables businesses to play an active part in
production (ICT supply chain), tailoring ICT services to their changing needs.
However, the technology that supports this relationship must be based on
standards. Cloud computing promises to make switching to a different provider
quick and easy, but that is only possible if users are careful to avoid provider
lock-in.
304
T-SYSTEMS’ CLOUD-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR BUSINESS APPLICATIONS


11.4
IMPORTANCE OF QUALITY AND SECURITY IN CLOUDS
11.4.1
Quality (End-to-End SLAs)
If consumers’ Internet or ICT services are unavailable, or data access is slow,
the consequences are rarely serious. But in business, the nonavailability of a
service can have a grave knock-on effect on entire mission-critical processes—
bringing production to a standstill, or preventing orders from being processed.
In such instances, quality is of the essence. The user is aware of the
performance of systems as a whole, including network connectivity. In complex
software applications, comprising multiple services and technical components,
each individual element poses a potential risk to the smooth running of
processes. Cloud-service providers therefore have to offer end-to-end avail-
ability, backed by clearly deﬁned SLAs.
The speciﬁc quality requirements are determined by weighing up risk against
cost. The importance of a particular process and the corresponding IT solution
are assessed. The ﬁndings are then compared with the service levels on offer. As
a rule, higher service levels come at a higher price. Where a process is not
critical, businesses are often willing to accept relatively low availability to
minimize costs. But if a process is critical, they will opt for a higher service level,
with a corresponding price tag. So the quality question is not about combining
the highest service levels, but about selecting the right levels for each service.
11.4.2
Compliance and Security
Compliance and security are increasingly important for cloud-computing
providers. Security has been the subject of extensive media coverage and
debate. And surveys consistently pinpoint it as the greatest obstacle to cloud
computing. In a 2008 cio.com study, IT decision-makers cited security and loss
of control over data as the key drawbacks of cloud computing.
However, for businesses looking to deploy a form of cloud computing, legal
issues (e.g., privacy and liability) are considerably more important. And this is
why cloud providers have to ﬁnd ways of enabling customers to meet statutory
requirements.
Consumer Cloud Versus Enterprise Cloud. The Internet has given rise to
new forms of behavior, even when concluding contracts on-line. When
presented with general terms and conditions, many consumers simply check
the relevant box and click “OK,” often not realizing that they are entering into
a legally binding agreement. Standard contracts are now commonly used for
consumer services offered from the cloud. However, this does not meet the
demands of businesses.
Cloud computing raises no new legal issues, but it makes existing ones more
complex. This increased complexity is due to two factors. On the one hand,
cloud computing means that data no longer have to reside in a single location.
11.4
IMPORTANCE OF QUALITY AND SECURITY IN CLOUDS
305


On the other hand, business scenarios involving multiple partners are now
conceivable. It is therefore often impossible to say exactly where data are stored
and what national legislation applies. And where data are handled by multiple
providers from different countries (sometimes on the basis of poorly structured
contracts), the issue of liability becomes correspondingly complex.
Cloud Computing from an Enterprise Perspective. With this in mind,
businesses should insist on comprehensive, watertight contracts that include
provisions for the recovery and return of their data, even in the event of
provider bankruptcy. Moreover, they should establish the country where
servers and storage systems are located. Cloud principles notwithstanding,
services still have to be performed and data stored at speciﬁc physical locations.
Where data are located determines whose law applies and also determines
which government agencies can access it. In addition to these “hard” factors,
enterprises have to consider that data-privacy cultures differ from country to
country.
Having the legal basis for liability claims is one thing; successfully prosecut-
ing them is quite another. This is why it is important to know the contractually
agreed legal venue. Moreover, it is useful to have a single end-to-end service
level agreement deﬁning availability across all services.
Even stricter statutory requirements apply where data are of a personal
nature (e.g., employee details in an HR system). Financial data are also subject
to stringent restrictions. In many parts of Europe, personal data enjoys special
protection. But even encryption cannot guarantee total security. Solutions that
process and store data in encrypted form go a long way toward meeting
statutory data-protection requirements. However, they are prohibited in some
countries. As a result, there are limits to secure data encryption in the cloud.
Companies listed on the U.S. stock exchange are subject to the Sarbanes
Oxley Act (SOX), requiring complete data transparency and audit trails. This
poses particular challenges for cloud providers. To comply with SOX 404,
CEOs, CFOs, and external auditors have to report annually on the adequacy of
internal control systems for ﬁnancial reporting. ICT service providers are
responsible for demonstrating the transparency of ﬁnancial transactions. How-
ever, providing this evidence is especially difﬁcult, if not impossible, in a cloud
environment. This is a challenge that cloud providers must master—if necessary,
by departing from cloud principles.
Service providers also have to ensure that data are not lost and do not fall
into the wrong hands. The EU has data-security regulations that apply for all
European companies. For example, personal details may only be disclosed to
third parties with the consent of the individual involved. Moreover, public-
sector organizations generally insist on having sensitive data processed in their
home country. This is a particularly thorny issue when it comes to patents, since
attitudes to intellectual property differ greatly around the world.
Moreover, some industries and markets have their own statutory require-
ments. It is therefore essential that customers discuss their speciﬁc needs with
306
T-SYSTEMS’ CLOUD-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR BUSINESS APPLICATIONS
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>


the provider. And the provider should be familiar with industry-speciﬁc
practices and acquire appropriate certiﬁcation.
Providers also have to safeguard data against loss, and businesses that use
cloud services should seek a detailed breakdown of disaster-recovery and
business-continuity plans.
Other legal issues may arise directly from the technology behind cloud
computing. On the one hand, conventional software licensing (based on CPUs)
can run counter to cloud-computing business models. On the other hand,
licenses are sometimes subject to geographical restrictions, making it difﬁcult to
deploy them across borders.
What Enterprises Need. Cloud computing and applicable ICT legislation are
based on diametrically opposed principles. The former is founded on liberalism
and unfettered development—in this case, of technical opportunities. The latter
imposes tight constraints on the handling of data and services, as well as on the
relationship between customers and providers. And it seems unlikely that these
two perspectives will be reconciled in the near future.
Cloud providers have to meet the requirements of the law and of customers
alike. As a rule, this leads them to abandon some principles of “pure” cloud
computing—and to adopt only those elements that can be aligned with
applicable legislation and without risk. However, deployment scenarios invol-
ving services from a public cloud are not inconceivable. So providers have to
critically adapt cloud principles.
Furthermore, providers working for major corporations have to be depend-
able in the long term, particularly where they deliver made-to-measure
solutions for particular business processes. This is true whether the process is
critical or not. If a provider goes out of business, companies can expect to be
without the service for a long time. So before selecting a cloud provider,
customers should take a long hard look at candidates’ services, ability to deliver
on promises, and, above all, how well SLAs meet their needs [4].
11.5
DYNAMIC DATA CENTER—PRODUCING BUSINESS-READY,
DYNAMIC ICT SERVICES
11.5.1
Flexibility Across All Modules
Agility at the infrastructure level alone is not enough to provide fast, ﬂexible
ICT services. Other dynamic levels and layers are also required (Figure 11.2)
[3]. Ultimately, what matters to the user is the ﬂexibility of the system or service
as a whole. So service quality is determined by the slowest component.
Adaptable processing and storage resources at the computing level must be
supported by agile LAN and WAN infrastructures. Flexibility is also important
when it comes to application delivery, scalability, and extensibility via func-
tional modules. Management processes must allow for manual intervention,
11.5
DYNAMIC DATA CENTER—PRODUCING BUSINESS-READY, DYNAMIC ICT SERVICES
307


where necessary, and automatically link the various layers. These factors enable
the creation of end-to-end SLAs across all components.
Every dynamic ICT service is based on a resource pool from which
computing, data, and storage services can be delivered as required. Dynamic
network and application services are also available. Moreover, the (business)
applications are optimized for deployment with pooled resources.
When customers opt for a dynamic service, they require an SLA that covers
not only individual components, but also the service as a whole, including any
WAN elements.
Toward Dynamic, Flexible ICT Services. The ﬁrst step is to standardize the
customer’s existing environment. IT systems running different software releases
have to be migrated, often to a single operating system. Hardware also has to
be standardized—for example, by bringing systems onto a speciﬁc processor
generation (such as x86). Eliminating disparate operating systems and hard-
ware platforms at this stage makes it considerably easier to automate further
down the line.
The second step is technical consolidation. This not only reduces the number
of physical servers, but also slims down data storage. Identical backup and
restore mechanisms are introduced at this stage; and small, uneconomical data
centers are closed.
The third step involves separating the logical from the physical. Virtualiza-
tion means that services no longer depend on speciﬁc hardware. This has
particular beneﬁts in terms of maintenance. Moreover, virtualization enables
server resources to be subdivided and allocated to different tasks.
Automate
Virtualize
Consolidate
Standardize
Business processes
Business processes 
Application management services/staff 
Networks (LAN, WAN) 
me
Application managem
Applic tio m nageme
or
w
Ne
Network
Oracle
Lotus
Desktop
…
Web
services
SAP
Archiv-
ing
Voice
Ex-
change
…
-
- -
-
End-to-End SLAs
End-to-End SLAs
Processing power (computing, data, storage, archive)
FIGURE 11.2. Flexibility at all levels is a basic requirement for cloud computing.
308
T-SYSTEMS’ CLOUD-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR BUSINESS APPLICATIONS


Process automation is more than just another component—it is key to
meeting the rising demand for IT services. What’s more, it slashes costs,
improves efﬁciency (for example, by preventing errors), and accelerates
standard procedures. Providers’ ability to offer cloud-computing services will
largely depend on whether they can implement mechanisms for automatic
management, allocation, and invoicing of resources.
In the business world, automation must also support seamless integration of
ﬁnancial, accounting, and ordering systems.
11.5.2
T-Systems’ Core Cloud Modules: Computing, Storage
Computing. The computing pool is based on server farms located in different
data centers. Logical server systems are created automatically at these farms.
The server systems comply with predeﬁned standards. They are equipped with
the network interface cards required for communications and integration with
storage systems. No internal hard drives or direct-attached storage systems are
deployed.
The conﬁguration management database (CMDB) plays a key role in
computing resource pools (Figure 11.3). This selects and conﬁgures the
required physical server (1). Once a server has been selected from the pool,
virtualization technology is selected in line with the relevant application and the
demands it has to meet (2). At the same time, the conﬁguration requirements
are sent to the network conﬁguration management system (3) and to the
storage conﬁguration management system (4). Once all the necessary elements
are in place, the storage systems are mounted on the servers, after which the
operating-system images are booted (5).
Storage, data
VMWare
Solaris LDOM
Integrity VM
IBM Power 5 LPAR
Network
Configuration management
DC1
DWDM
DC2
Virtualization
4
1
3
5
2
FIGURE 11.3. Provision of computing resources.
11.5
DYNAMIC DATA CENTER—PRODUCING BUSINESS-READY, DYNAMIC ICT SERVICES
309


Cloud computing enables a customer’s application to be switched from
server to server within a deﬁned group at virtually any interval (from minutes to
hours or days). This means that the conﬁguration database must be updated
automatically to accurately reﬂect the current state of systems and conﬁgura-
tions at all times.
The CMDB also supports other tasks that are not required in conventional
ICT environments. These include enhanced monitoring and reporting, quality
management, and corresponding resource planning. Moreover, an ongoing
inventory
of
systems
and
their
conﬁgurations
is
essential
for
rapid
troubleshooting.
Operating systems are provided in the form of images stored on a central
storage system. These are in read-only mode to ensure rapid startup. To limit
the number of operating systems and releases—and minimize related admin-
istrative effort—only one version of each operating system is maintained. This
is employed to conﬁgure and boot the servers. This high degree of standardiza-
tion signiﬁcantly reduces administration overhead.
Applications Are Also Virtualized. Speed is of the essence for cloud-computing
providers. Decoupling operating systems from applications plays a key role
here, because it reduces both initial and subsequent application-provisioning
time (following a failure, for example). Making applications available is simply
a matter of mounting them. This approach has other advantages: Applications
can quickly be moved from one server to another, and updates can be managed
independently of operating systems.
However, the full beneﬁts can only be realized if there is a high degree of
automation and standardization in the IT infrastructure and the applications
themselves.
Storage. The necessary storage is provided and conﬁgured in much the same
way as the computing resources. IP-based storage systems are deployed. To
reduce hardware-conﬁguration effort, the computing systems use neither SAN
nor direct-attached storage.
Using ﬁber-channel (FC) cards in the servers and deploying an FC network
increases overall system complexity substantially. The IP storage systems are
linked via Gbit Ethernet. Storage is automatically allocated to the server
systems that require it.
Storage resources are located in different ﬁre zones as well as in different
data centers, preventing data loss in the event of a disaster. The storage system
handles replication of data between data centers and ﬁre zones, so computing
resources are not needed for this purpose (Figure 11.4).
Backup-Integrated Storage. In addition to storage resources, backups are
necessary to safeguard against data loss. For this reason, and in the interests of
automation, the Dynamic Data Center model directly couples backup to
310
T-SYSTEMS’ CLOUD-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR BUSINESS APPLICATIONS


storage; in other words, backup-integrated storage (BIS) is provided, along
with full management functionality.
To accelerate backup and reduce the volume of data transferred, data are
backed up on hard disks within the storage system by means of snapshotting.
This simpliﬁes the structure of the computing systems (as no backup LAN is
necessary) and minimizes the potential for temporal bottlenecks.
Storage systems normally provide for a 35-day storage period. Usually, the
last three days are accessible on-line, with the rest being accessible from a
remote site.
Archive and Other Storage. Archive systems are also available for long-term
data storage. Like BIS, these are hard-disk-based and linked via IP to the
respective systems. Data for archiving is replicated within the archive system
and in a separate ﬁre zone, as well as at a remote data center. Replication is
handled by the archive system itself.
Archive storage can be managed in two ways. Archiving can be initiated
either from the applications themselves, which then handle administration of all
data, or via a document management system.
Some systems require a hard-disk cache. This is not worth backing up via
BIS, since data in a cache change rapidly, and the original data are stored and
backed up elsewhere in the system.
Communications. The computing and storage modules are integrated via an
automatically conﬁgured LAN or corresponding virtual networks (VPNs). The
Data, backup and configuration management
DC 1
DC 2
Backup
Integrated
Storage 
Data
Application
OS
Archive
DWDM
Backup
Backup
Snapshot
Mirror
FIGURE 11.4. Storage resources: backup-integrated, read-only, and archive storage.
11.5
DYNAMIC DATA CENTER—PRODUCING BUSINESS-READY, DYNAMIC ICT SERVICES
311


servers deployed in the computing module are equipped with multiple network
cards as standard. Depending on requirements, these are grouped to form the
necessary networks.
Networks are segregated from each other by means of VPN technology.
Backup-integrated storage eliminates the need for a separate backup network.
Customer Network. Access for customers is provided via Internet/VPN con-
nections. Services are assigned to companies by means of unique IP addresses.
As standard, access to Dynamic Data Centers is protected via redundant,
clustered ﬁrewalls. Various versions are available to cater to a range of
different customer and application requirements. Virtual ﬁrewalls are conﬁg-
ured automatically. Due to the high level of standardization, access is entirely
IP-based.
Storage and Administration Network. A separate storage network is provided
for accessing operating-system images, applications, and customer and archive
data. Conﬁguration is handled automatically. An additional network, segre-
gated from the others, is available for managing IT components. Used purely
for systems conﬁguration and other administration tasks, this network has no
access to the customer’s data or content.
11.5.3
Dynamic Services—A Brief Overview
The Dynamic Data Center concept underlies all T-Systems Dynamic Services.
All the resources required by a given service are automatically provided by the
data center. This lays the foundations for a portfolio of solutions aimed at
business customers.
Dynamic Applications for Enterprises. Enterprises require applications
that support speciﬁc processes. This applies both to traditional outsourcing
and to business relationships in the cloud. T-Systems has tailored its portfolio
to fulﬁll these requirements.
 Communications and Collaboration. These are key components for any
company. Work on projects often entails frequent changes in user
numbers. As a result, enterprises need ﬂexible means of handling com-
munications and collaboration. T-Systems offers the two leading e-mail
systems, Microsoft Exchange and IBM Lotus Domino via Dynamic
Services, ensuring their rapid integration into existing environments.
 ERP and CRM. Dynamic systems are available to support core ERP and
CRM processes. T-Systems offers SAP and Navision solutions in this
space.
 Development and Testing. Software developers often need access—at short
notice and for limited periods of time—to server systems running a variety
of operating system versions and releases. Dynamic Services offer the
312
T-SYSTEMS’ CLOUD-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR BUSINESS APPLICATIONS


ﬂexibility needed to meet these demands. Conﬁgured systems that are not
currently required can be locked and mothballed. So when computing
resources are no longer needed, no further costs are incurred. That is the
advantage of Dynamic Services for developers.
 Middleware. When it comes to middleware, Dynamic Services can lay the
foundation for further (more complex) services. In addition, businesses
can deploy them directly and integrate them into their own infrastructure.
The common term for offerings of this type is platform-as-a-service
(PaaS). T-Systems’ middleware portfolio includes dynamic databases,
Web servers, portals, and archiving components.
 Front-Ends and Devices. Not only business applications, but also users’ PC
systems, can be provided via the cloud. These systems, including ofﬁce
applications, can be made available to users via Dynamic Desktop
Services.
Introducing New Services in a Dynamic Data Center. Cloud computing is
developing at a rapid pace. This means that providers have to continuously
review and extend their offerings. Here, too, a standardized approach is key to
ensuring that the services delivered meet business customers’ requirements.
First, automatic mechanisms have to be developed for standardizing the
installation of typical combinations of operating system, database, and
application software. These mechanisms must also support automated proce-
dures for starting and stopping applications. The software components and
their automatic management functions are subject to release and patch
management procedures agreed with the vendors.
Deploying the combination of version and patches authorized by the vendor
enables a provider to assume end-to-end responsibility for a service. Automatic
monitoring and monthly reports are put in place for each service. An operating
manual is developed and its recommendations tested in a pilot installation
before the production environment goes live. The operating manual includes
automatic data backup procedures.
Next, a variety of quality options are developed. These can include redun-
dant resources across multiple ﬁre zones. A concept for segregating appli-
cations from each other is also created. This must include provisions for
selectively enabling communications with other applications via deﬁned inter-
faces, implemented in line with customer wishes. Only after EU legislation
(particularly regarding liability) has been reviewed is the application rolled out
to data centers worldwide.
11.5.4
Dynamic Data Centers Across the Globe
T-Systems delivers Dynamic Services from multiple data centers around the
world (Figure 11.5). These are mostly designed as twin-core facilities; in other
words, each location has two identical data centers several kilometers apart.
11.5
DYNAMIC DATA CENTER—PRODUCING BUSINESS-READY, DYNAMIC ICT SERVICES
313


All Dynamic Data Centers are based on the original concept used for the
ﬁrst data center of this kind in Frankfurt. There are currently facilities in the
United States, Brazil, Germany, Singapore, and Malaysia.
11.6
CASE STUDIES
The industrialization of outsourcing not only impacts costs, it also affects
customers’ business processes and sourcing strategies. In terms of sourcing, the
effects depend on the company’s current ICT and on the size of the enterprise.
This is particularly obvious in the case of startups or businesses with an existing
ICT infrastructure.
Dynamic ICT Services for Startups. Startups often have no ICT infrastructure
and lack the knowledge required to establish and operate one. However, to put
their business concepts into practice, companies of this kind need rapid access
to reliable, fully functional ICT services. And because it is difﬁcult to predict
how a startup will grow, its ICT has to offer maximum scalability and
ﬂexibility, thereby enabling the company to meet market requirements. More-
over, few venture capitalists are prepared to invest in inﬂexible hardware and
software that has to be depreciated over a number of years.
By deploying dynamic ICT services, a startup can ﬁnd its feet in those early,
uncertain stages—without maintaining in-house ICT. And if demand falls, the
company does not have to foot the bill for unneeded resources. Instead, it can
quickly and easily scale down—and invest more capital in core tasks.
Dynamic ICT Services at Companies with Existing ICT Infrastructures. In
comparison to startups, most large companies already have established ICT
First customer
on the dynamic
platform 
Dynamic Services
Cost
monitoring
with cockpit
functionality-
with daily
updates     
Dynamic Data
Center in Frankfurt 
15
customers 
SAP Pinnacle
Award 
1,000th
SAP sys. 
DDC Munich
DDC
Shanghai 
DDC
Sao Paolo 
DDC Jackson-
ville/USA
Establishment
of first 
international 
Dynamic Data
Center 
Deutsche
Telekom/DKK
project
Migrated one of the
world’s largest SAP
systems to a 
dynamic platform.
9 TB database 
All legal requirements
(German, EU and US) for
systems validation fulfilled 
Europe’s largest 
SAP system 
2008
2007
2006
2004
2009
2010
. . .
90 SAP Hosting
customers 
Run SAP
FIGURE 11.5. The development of Dynamic Services.
314
T-SYSTEMS’ CLOUD-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR BUSINESS APPLICATIONS


departments, with the skills needed to deliver the desired services. These in-
house units often focus on ICT security rather than ﬂexibility. After all, a
company’s knowledge and expertise resides to a large extent in its data. These
data must be secure and available at all times—because it is often a business-
critical asset, the loss of which could jeopardize the company’s future.
In addition to cost savings, companies that use Dynamic Services beneﬁt
from greater transparency—it is clear at all times which resources are available
and which are currently being used.
The opportunity to source ICT as a service opens up a wide range of new
options. For example, an international player with a complex legacy environ-
ment can introduce Dynamic Services for SAP Solutions for a speciﬁc business
segment by adding resources to its German company and then rolling these out
to its other national subsidiaries. This kind of dynamic ICT provisioning also
enables fast, ﬂexible penetration of new markets, without the need for advance
planning and long-term operation of additional ICT resources. And seasonal
ﬂuctuations in business can be dealt with even more easily.
Figure 11.6 shows the ﬂexible and dynamic provisioning of resources.
Provisioning starts during the implementation phase, with a development
and test environment over a one-month period. This is followed by go-live of
the production environment. Additional development and training resources
can be accessed rapidly, if and when required.
11.6.1
Example: Dynamic Infrastructure Services
A mid-sized furniture manufacturer with over 800 employees leverages dynamic
infrastructure services. Within the scope of make-to-order manufacturing, the
company produces couches and armchairs in line with customers’ speciﬁc needs.
On average, it makes some 1500 couches and armchairs daily. During the
Performance
2006
2007
2008
3 month
development
system 
1 month
test 
system
2 weeks
training system
Performance upgrades for quaterly reports
available on a day-by-day base
FIGURE 11.6. Flexible ICT provisioning for dynamic markets.
11.6
CASE STUDIES
315


summer months, this ﬁgure is almost halved—and use of the company’s in-house
IT falls accordingly. In June 2005, the IT department outsourced data backup
and provisioning of mainframe resources to T-Systems. The service provider
now provides these as services, on a pay-per-use basis. As a result, the furniture
manufacturer no longer has to maintain in-house IT resources sized for peak
loads. Instead, its IT infrastructure is provided as a service [infrastructure as a
service (IaaS)].
If the data volume or number of users suddenly rises or falls, the company
can scale its resources up or down—and costs increase or decrease accordingly.
At the same time, it beneﬁts from a solution that is always at the leading edge of
technology, without having to invest in that technology itself. Through regular
reporting, the customer also gains new transparency into the services it uses.
Around-the-clock monitoring provides maximum protection against system
failure and downtime. And the service provider backs up data from production
planning, on-line sales, transactions, e-mails, and the ERP system at one of its
data centers.
11.6.2
Example: Dynamic Services for SAP
Infrastructure services like these enable the delivery of more complex services.
In this context, T-Systems specializes in business-critical applications supported
by SAP. So far about 100 European-based companies use Dynamic Services
from T-Systems. Among them are Shell, Philips, Linde, and MAN.
In this case a global group with a workforce of almost 500,000 in 60
countries operates in various business segments. However, its core business is
direct sales: The enterprise sells its products via sales partners, who process
110,000 orders each week using the central SAP system. If these orders are not
processed, payment will not be received; as a result, system failure could
signiﬁcantly impact the company. Furthermore, around one million calls (in
Germany alone) are handled each year in the CRM module, as are tasks
ranging from a simple change of address to changes in ﬁnancing arrangements.
The group’s IT strategy is therefore focused on ensuring efﬁcient, effective IT
support for its international direct sales.
Due to weekly commissions for sales employees and the unpredictable
nature of call-center activities, system-sizing estimates can vary by up to
500%. In addition, the rapid development of the company’s SAP R/3 solution,
in conjunction with an international rollout, has signiﬁcantly increased IT
resource requirements. Because it was virtually impossible to quantify these
factors in advance, the company decided to migrate to a dynamic platform
for future delivery of its SAP services. The entire application was transferred to
T-Systems’ data center, where it has been operated using a Dynamic Services
model since January 2006.
With the move, the group has implemented a standardization strategy
that enables ﬂexible adaptation of business processes and makes for more
straightforward and transparent group-wide reporting. With a conventional
316
T-SYSTEMS’ CLOUD-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR BUSINESS APPLICATIONS


infrastructure sized for peak loads, SAP R/3 operating costs would have been
twice as high as with the current dynamic solution. Furthermore, the company
now has the opportunity to scale its resources up or down by 50% within a
single day.
11.6.3
DKK: Europe’s Largest SAP Installation Is Run
in a Private Cloud
Many simple applications and small-scale, non-core systems already run in the
cloud. And now, some enterprises are having larger-scale, mission-critical apps
delivered in this way, or via their own secure clouds. For example, Deutsche
Telekom currently utilizes ICT services from a private cloud for some of its
business-critical processes.
This move was motivated by the desire to establish a highly scalable, on-
demand system for processing invoicing and payments and for managing
customer accounts and receivables. Deutsche Telekom’s revenue management
system, DKK, handles more than 1.5 million payments a day from approxi-
mately 30 million customers, making it one of the largest SAP installations in
the world (Figure 11.5).
T-Systems migrated the legacy server environment, comprising two mono-
lithic systems with a capacity of some 50,000 SAPS, to a highly standardized,
rapidly scalable solution based on Dynamic Services for SAP. Performance
improved by more than 20%, while costs sank by 30%.
The customer can freely scale ICT resources up or down. Furthermore, a
disaster recovery solution was established at a second, remote data center for
failure protection. The system currently handles nine terabytes of data.
The signiﬁcant cost reductions are the result of vendor-independent standardi-
zationofhardwarewithclustereddeploymentofcommoditycomponents,backup-
integrated storage, and extensively standardized processes and procedures.
Quantiﬁable improvements, in technical terms, include a 45% drop in server
response times and a 40% reduction in batch-job processing times. Even client
response times have shrunk by close to 10%. This means that the new platform
signiﬁcantly exceeds the targeted 20% improvement in overall system perfor-
mance. The dynamic cloud solution has proved more cost-effective, and
delivers better performance, than an environment operated on traditional lines.
Thetransitiontothenewplatformdidnotinvolvemodiﬁcationstothecustom-
developed SAP ABAP programs. Returning to a conventional environment
would be even more straightforward, since no changes to the operating system
would be required, and the application’s business logic would not be affected.
11.6.4
Migrating Globally Distributed SAP Systems
to a Dynamic Platform
Even experienced ICT providers with a successful track record in transforma-
tion projects have to perform risk analysis, including fallback scenarios. To
11.6
CASE STUDIES
317


reduce the risk of migrations (in both directions), cloud providers that serve
large enterprises require skills in both conventional operations and cloud
computing.
In one transformation engagement, when the contract was signed, the
customer was operating 232 SAP systems worldwide, with a total capacity of
1.2 million SAPS. Initially, T-Systems assumed responsibility for the systems
within the scope of a conventional outsourcing agreement, without changing
the mode of operation. The original environment was then gradually replaced
by a commercial cloud solution (managed private cloud). This approach has
since become established practice for the T-Systems. Within the agreed time-
frame of 18 months, 80% of the systems were migrated. This major project
involved not only SAP software, but also non-SAP systems, which were
brought onto the new platform via dedicated interfaces.
Projects on this scale have a lasting inﬂuence on a service provider’s data-
center infrastructure, and they drive IT industrialization. In this particular
engagement, the most compelling arguments for the customer were (a) the
security and reliability of the provider’s data centers and (b) the smooth
interaction between the SAP interfaces. Transparency throughout the entire
systems landscape, lower costs, and greater responsiveness to changing require-
ments were the key customer beneﬁts.
11.7
SUMMARY: CLOUD COMPUTING OFFERS MUCH
MORE THAN TRADITIONAL OUTSOURCING
Cloud computing is an established concept from the private world that is
gaining ground in the business world. This trend can help large corporations
master some of their current challenges—for example, cost and market
pressures that call for increased productivity. While conventional outsourcing
can help enterprises cut costs, it cannot deliver the ﬂexibility they need.
And greater ﬂexibility brings even greater savings. Cloud computing poses a
challenge to traditional outsourcing models. If the paradigm shift becomes
a reality, IT users will have even more choice when it comes to selecting a
provider—and cloud computing will become a further alternative to existing
sourcing options.
Cloud computing makes for a more straightforward and ﬂexible relationship
between providers and their customers. Contracts can be concluded more
rapidly, and resources are available on demand. What’s more, users beneﬁt
from end-to-end services delivered dynamically in line with their speciﬁc
business requirements. And companies only pay for the services they actually
use, signiﬁcantly lowering IT investment. In a nutshell, cloud computing means
that IT services are available as and when they are needed—helping pare back
costs.
When it comes to selecting a sourcing model, cost and ﬂexibility are only two
of the many factors that have to be taken into account. Further important
318
T-SYSTEMS’ CLOUD-BASED SOLUTIONS FOR BUSINESS APPLICATIONS


aspects are data privacy, security, compliance with applicable legislation, and
quality of service. The public cloud cannot offer a solution to these issues,
which is why private clouds are well worth considering.
Providers of cloud computing for large corporations need to be able to
intelligently combine their offerings with customer-speciﬁc IT systems and
services. In some cases, they can also leverage resources and services from the
public cloud.
But ﬁrst, companies must consider which services and resources can be
outsourced to the cloud, and they must also deﬁne how important each one is
for the organization. Services that are not mission critical do not require robust
service levels and can be delivered via the public cloud. But business-critical IT
processes call for clearly deﬁned SLAs, which, in turn, pushes up costs. Private
clouds are an effective way of meeting these requirements.
In both cloud-computing models, services are delivered on a standardized
basis. This reﬂects a general trend toward the industrialization of IT. Provision
of services via a private cloud requires higher standards of quality than via the
public cloud. By means of industrialization, cloud-computing providers enable
more efﬁcient use of their IT infrastructures, thereby increasing productivity.
This not only cuts production costs, it also reduces the environmental footprint
of businesses’ IT.
Case studies show that the general principles of cloud computing have
already been successfully adapted and employed for business-critical applica-
tions hosted in a private cloud. However, enterprises must carefully weigh up
the pros and cons of each model and decide which resources can be provided
via the public cloud and which require a private cloud.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank various colleagues, especially Dr. Martin Reti for his
comments and extensive discussions on this chapter.
REFERENCES
1.
M. Reti and M. Pauly, Cloud Computing—Alternative Sourcing Strategy for
Business ICT, White Paper, T-Systems, Frankfurt/Main, March 2009.
2.
T. Chou, Seven Software Business Models, Active Book Press, 2008.
3.
M. Pauly, Dynamic Services—Flexible ICT Resources Implemented Based on Need,
White Paper, T-Systems, Frankfurt/Main, March, 2008.
4.
J. Staten, Is Cloud Computing Ready for the Enterprise? Not Yet, But This Disruptive
Innovation Is Maturing Fast, Forrester Research, March 7, 2008.
REFERENCES
319


CHAPTER 12
WORKFLOW ENGINE FOR CLOUDS
SURAJ PANDEY, DILEBAN KARUNAMOORTHY,
and RAJKUMAR BUYYA
12.1
INTRODUCTION
A workﬂow models a process as consisting of a series of steps that simpliﬁes the
complexity of execution and management of applications. Scientiﬁc workﬂows
in domains such as high-energy physics and life sciences utilize distributed
resources in order to access, manage, and process a large amount of data from a
higher level. Processing and managing such large amounts of data require the
use of a distributed collection of computation and storage facilities. These
resources are often limited in supply and are shared among many competing
users. The recent progress in virtualization technologies and the rapid growth
of cloud computing services have opened a new paradigm in distributed
computing for utilizing existing (and often cheaper) resource pools for on-
demand and scalable scientiﬁc computing. Scientiﬁc Workﬂow Management
Systems (WfMS) need to adapt to this new paradigm in order to leverage the
beneﬁts of cloud services.
Cloud services vary in the levels of abstraction and hence the type of service
they present to application users. Infrastructure virtualization enables provi-
ders such as Amazon1 to offer virtual hardware for use in compute- and data-
intensive workﬂow applications. Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS) clouds expose a
higher-level development and runtime environment for building and deploying
workﬂow applications on cloud infrastructures. Such services may also expose
domain-speciﬁc concepts for rapid-application development. Further up in the
cloud stack are Software-as-a-Service providers who offer end users with
Cloud Computing: Principles and Paradigms,
Edited by Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg and
Andrzej Goscinski
Copyright r 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
1 http://aws.amazon.com
321


standardized software solutions that could be integrated into existing
workﬂows.
This chapter presents workﬂow engines and its integration with the cloud
computing paradigm. We start by reviewing existing solutions for workﬂow
applications and their limitations with respect to scalability and on-demand
access.Wethen discuss someofthekeybeneﬁtsthatcloudservicesoffer workﬂow
applications, compared to traditional grid environments. Next, we give a brief
introduction to workﬂow management systems in order to highlight components
that will become an essential part of the discussions in this chapter. We discuss
strategies for utilizing cloud resources in workﬂow applications next, along with
architectural changes, useful tools, and services. We then present a case study on
the use of cloud services for a scientiﬁc workﬂow application and ﬁnally end the
chapter with a discussion on visionary thoughts and the key challenges to realize
them. In order to aid our discussions, we refer to the workﬂow management
system and cloud middleware developed at CLOUDS Lab, University of
Melbourne. These tools, referred to as Cloudbus toolkit [1], henceforth, are
mature platforms arising from years of research and development.
12.2
BACKGROUND
Over the recent past, a considerable body of work has been done on the use of
workﬂow systems for scientiﬁc applications. Yu and Buyya [2] provide a
comprehensive taxonomy of workﬂow management systems based on work-
ﬂow design, workﬂow scheduling, fault management, and data movement.
They characterize and classify different approaches for building and executing
workﬂows on Grids. They also study existing grid workﬂow systems high-
lighting key features and differences.
Some of the popular workﬂow systems for scientiﬁc applications include
DAGMan (Directed Acyclic Graph MANager) [3, 4], Pegasus [5], Kepler [6],
and Taverna workbench [7]. DAGMan is a workﬂow engine under the Pegasus
workﬂow management system. Pegasus uses DAGMan to run the executable
workﬂow. Kepler provides support for Web-service-based workﬂows. It uses
an actor-oriented design approach for composing and executing scientiﬁc
application workﬂows. The computational components are called actors, and
they are linked together to form a workﬂow. The Taverna workbench enables
the automation of experimental methods through the integration of various
services, including WSDL-based single operation Web services, into workﬂows.
For a detailed description of these systems, we refer you to Yu and Buyya [2].
Scientiﬁc workﬂows are commonly executed on shared infrastructure such as
Tera-Grid,2 Open Science Grid,3 and dedicated clusters [8]. Existing workﬂow
systems tend to utilize these global Grid resources that are made available
2 http://www.teragrid.org
3 http://www.opensciencegrid.org
322
WORKFLOW ENGINE FOR CLOUDS


through prior agreements and typically at no cost. The notion of leveraging
virtualized resources was new, and the idea of using resources as a utility [9, 10]
was limited to academic papers and was not implemented in practice. With the
advent of cloud computing paradigm, economy-based utility computing is
gaining widespread adoption in the industry.
Deelman et al. [11] presented a simulation-based study on the costs involved
when executing scientiﬁc application workﬂows using cloud services. They
studied the cost performance trade-offs of different execution and resource
provisioning plans, and they also studied the storage and communication fees
of Amazon S3 in the context of an astronomy application known as Montage
[5, 10]. They conclude that cloud computing is a cost-effective solution for data-
intensive applications.
The Cloudbus toolkit [1] is our initiative toward providing viable solutions
for using cloud infrastructures. We propose a wider vision that incorporates an
inter-cloud architecture and a market-oriented utility computing model. The
Cloudbus workﬂow engine [12], presented in the sections to follow, is a step
toward scaling workﬂow applications on clouds using market-oriented
computing.
12.3
WORKFLOW MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS AND CLOUDS
The primary beneﬁt of moving to clouds is application scalability. Unlike grids,
scalability of cloud resources allows real-time provisioning of resources to meet
application requirements at runtime or prior to execution. The elastic nature of
clouds facilitates changing of resource quantities and characteristics to vary at
runtime, thus dynamically scaling up when there is a greater need for additional
resources and scaling down when the demand is low. This enables workﬂow
management systems to readily meet quality-of-service (QoS) requirements of
applications, as opposed to the traditional approach that required advance
reservation of resources in global multi-user grid environments. With most
cloud computing services coming from large commercial organizations, service-
level agreements (SLAs) have been an important concern to both the service
providers and consumers. Due to competitions within emerging service
providers, greater care is being taken in designing SLAs that seek to offer (a)
better QoS guarantees to customers and (b) clear terms for compensation in the
event of violation. This allows workﬂow management systems to provide better
end-to-end guarantees when meeting the service requirements of users by
mapping them to service providers based on characteristics of SLAs. Econom-
ically motivated, commercial cloud providers strive to provide better services
guarantees compared to grid service providers. Cloud providers also take
advantage of economies of scale, providing compute, storage, and bandwidth
resources at substantially lower costs. Thus utilizing public cloud services could
be economical and a cheaper alternative (or add-on) to the more expensive
dedicated resources. One of the beneﬁts of using virtualized resources for
12.3
WORKFLOW MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS AND CLOUDS
323


workﬂow execution, as opposed to having direct access to the physical
machine, is the reduced need for securing the physical resource from malicious
code using techniques such as sandboxing. However, the long-term effect of
using virtualized resources in clouds that effectively share a “slice” of the
physical machine, as opposed to using dedicated resources for high-perfor-
mance applications, is an interesting research question.
12.3.1
Architectural Overview
Figure 12.1 presents a high-level architectural view of a Workﬂow Management
System (WfMS) utilizing cloud resources to drive the execution of a scientiﬁc
Switch
Aneka Cloud 
Workflow Engine
Resource Broker
Persistence
Storage
EC2
Plugin
Aneka
Plugin
A storage service such as FTP or Amazon S3
for temporary storage of application
components, such as executable and data
files, and output (result) files.
Workflow Management System –
schedules jobs in workflow to remote
resources based on user-specified QoS
requirements and SLA-based
negotiation with remote resources
capable of meeting those demands.
Local cluster with fixed
number of resources
Amazon EC2 instances
to augment to the local cluster
Storage
Executor
Executor
Executor
Storage
Scheduler
EC2 Instance
EC2 Instance
EC2 Instance
EC2 Instance
Workstation
Workstation
Workstation
Workstation
Workstation
Aneka Web Services
File Transfer
REST
Aneka Enterprise
Cloud Platform
REST
Job C1
Job C2
Job C3
Job B2
Job B1
Job A
Amazon Web Services
FIGURE 12.1. Workﬂow engine in the cloud.
324
WORKFLOW ENGINE FOR CLOUDS


workﬂow application. The workﬂow system comprises the workﬂow engine, a
resource broker [13], and plug-ins for communicating with various technolo-
gical platforms, such as Aneka [14] and Amazon EC2. A detailed architecture
describing the components of a WfMS is given in Section 12.4.
User applications could only use cloud services or use cloud together with
existing grid/cluster-based solutions. Figure 12.1 depicts two scenarios, one
where the Aneka platform is used in its entirety to complete the workﬂow, and
the other where Amazon EC2 is used to supplement a local cluster when there
are insufﬁcient resources to meet the QoS requirements of the application.
Aneka [13], described in further detail in Section 12.5, is a PaaS cloud and can be
run on a corporate network or a dedicated cluster or can be hosted entirely on an
IaaS cloud. Given limited resources in local networks, Aneka is capable of
transparently provisioning additional resources by acquiring new resources in
third-party cloud services such as Amazon EC2 to meet application demands.
This relieves the WfMS from the responsibility of managing and allocating
resources directly, to simply negotiating the required resources with Aneka.
Aneka also provides a set of Web services for service negotiation, job
submission, and job monitoring. The WfMS would orchestrate the workﬂow
execution by scheduling jobs in the right sequence to the Aneka Web Services.
The typical ﬂow of events when executing an application workﬂow on
Aneka would begin with the WfMS staging in all required data for each job
onto a remote storage resource, such as Amazon S3 or an FTP server. In this
case, the data would take the form of a set of ﬁles, including the application
binaries. These data can be uploaded by the user prior to execution, and they
can be stored in storage facilities offered by cloud services for future use. The
WfMS then forwards workﬂow tasks to Aneka’s scheduler via the Web service
interface. These tasks are subsequently examined for required ﬁles, and the
storage service is instructed to stage them in from the remote storage server, so
that they are accessible by the internal network of execution nodes. The
execution begins by scheduling tasks to available execution nodes (also known
as worker nodes). The workers download any required ﬁles for each task they
execute from the storage server, execute the application, and upload all output
ﬁles as a result of the execution back to the storage server. These ﬁles are then
staged out to the remote storage server so that they are accessible by other tasks
in the workﬂow managed by the WfMS. This process continues until the
workﬂow application is complete.
The second scenario describes a situation in which the WfMS has greater
control over the compute resources and provisioning policies for executing
workﬂow applications. Based on user-speciﬁed QoS requirements, the WfMS
schedules workﬂow tasks to resources that are located at the local cluster
and in the cloud. Typical parameters that drive the scheduling decisions in
such a scenario include deadline (time) and budget (cost) [15, 16]. For instance,
a policy for scheduling an application workﬂow at minimum execution
cost would utilize local resources and then augment them with cheaper
cloud resources, if needed, rather than using high-end but more expensive
12.3
WORKFLOW MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS AND CLOUDS
325


cloud resources. On the contrary, a policy that scheduled workﬂows to achieve
minimum execution time would always use high-end cluster and cloud
resources, irrespective of costs. The resource provisioning policy determines
the extent of additional resources to be provisioned on the public clouds. In this
second scenario, the WfMS interacts directly with the resources provisioned.
When using Aneka, however, all interaction takes place via the Web service
interface.
The following sections focuses on the integration of workﬂow management
systems and clouds and describes in detail practical issues involved in using
clouds for scientiﬁc workﬂow applications.
12.4
ARCHITECTURE OF WORKFLOW MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
Scientiﬁc applications are typically modeled as workﬂows, consisting of tasks,
data elements, control sequences and data dependencies. Workﬂow manage-
ment systems are responsible for managing and executing these workﬂows.
According to Raicu et al. [17], scientiﬁc workﬂow management systems are
engaged and applied to the following aspects of scientiﬁc computations: (1)
describing complex scientiﬁc procedures (using GUI tools, workﬂow speciﬁc
languages), (2) automating data derivation processes (data transfer compo-
nents), (3) high-performance computing (HPC) to improve throughput and
performance (distributed resources and their coordination), and (4) provenance
management and query (persistence components). The Cloudbus Workﬂow
Management System [12] consists of components that are responsible for
handling tasks, data and resources taking into account users’ QoS require-
ments. Its architecture is depicted in Figure 12.2. The architecture consists of
three major parts: (a) the user interface, (b) the core, and (c) plug-ins. The user
interface allows end users to work with workﬂow composition, workﬂow
execution planning, submission, and monitoring. These features are delivered
through a Web portal or through a stand-alone application that is installed at
the user’s end. Workﬂow composition is done using an XML-based Workﬂow
Language (xWFL). Users deﬁne task properties and link them based on their
data dependencies. Multiple tasks can be constructed using copy-paste func-
tions present in most GUIs.
The components within the core are responsible for managing the execution
of workﬂows. They facilitate in the translation of high-level workﬂow descrip-
tions (deﬁned at the user interface using XML) to task and data objects. These
objects are then used by the execution subsystem. The scheduling component
applies user-selected scheduling policies and plans to the workﬂows at various
stages intheir execution.Thetasksanddata dispatchersinteractwiththeresource
interface plug-ins to continuously submit and monitor tasks in the workﬂow.
These components form the core part of the workﬂow engine.
The plug-ins support workﬂow executions on different environments and
platforms. Our system has plug-ins for querying task and data characteristics
326
WORKFLOW ENGINE FOR CLOUDS


Workflow Management System
Application
Composition
Workflow
Planner
Workflow Description and Qos
Workflow Submission Handler
Resource Discovery
Data Movement
Monitoring Interface
Measurements
InterCloud
Scalable Application
Manager
CLOUD
Market Maker
Energy Consumption
Resource Utilization
Catalogs
MDS
Storage
Broker
HTTP
GUI
Text
Other
FTP
GridFTP
Planner
Replication
Service
Replica
Catalog
Grid
Market
Directory
Storage and
Replication
Workflow Language Parser
(XWFL, BPEL …)
Tasks
Sources
Parameters
Conditions
Workflow
Coordinator
Event
Service
Task Manager
Data Providence
Manager
Tasks Dispatcher
Resource Plug-in
Globus
Gridbus
Broker
Web
Services
Workflow Scheduler
Task Manager
Factory
Dependencies
Exceptions
Engine
Web Portal
....
User
Interface
Plug-in components
FIGURE 12.2. Architecture of Workﬂow Management System.
12.4
ARCHITECTURE OF WORKFLOW MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
327


(e.g., querying metadata services, reading from trace ﬁles), transferring data to
and from resources (e.g., transfer protocol implementations, and storage and
replication services), monitoring the execution status of tasks and applications
(e.g., real-time monitoring GUIs, logs of execution, and the scheduled retrieval
of task status), and measuring energy consumption.
The resources are at the bottom layer of the architecture and include
clusters, global grids, and clouds. The WfMS has plug-in components for
interacting with various resource management systems present at the front end
of distributed resources. Currently, the Cloudbus WfMS supports Aneka, Pbs,
Globus, and fork-based middleware. The resource managers may communicate
with the market maker, scalable application manager, and InterCloud services
for global resource management [18].
12.5
UTILIZING CLOUDS FOR WORKFLOW EXECUTION
Taking the leap to utilizing cloud services for scientiﬁc workﬂow applications
requires an understanding of the types of clouds services available, the required
component changes in workﬂow systems for interacting with cloud services, the
set of tools available to support development and deployment efforts, the steps
involved in deploying workﬂow systems and services on the cloud, and an
appreciation of the key beneﬁts and challenges involved. In the sections to
follow, we take a closer look at some of these issues. We begin by introducing
the reader to the Aneka Enterprise Cloud service. We do this for two reasons.
First, Aneka serves as a useful tool for utilizing clouds, including platform
abstraction and dynamic provisioning. Second, we describe later in the chapter
a case study detailing the use of Aneka to execute a scientiﬁc workﬂow
application on clouds.
12.5.1
Aneka
Aneka is a distributed middleware for deploying platform-as-a-service (PaaS)
offerings (Figure 12.3). Developed at CLOUDS Lab, University of Melbourne,
Aneka is the result of years of research on cluster, grid, and cloud computing
for high-performance computing (HPC) applications. Aneka, which is both a
development and runtime environment, is available for public use (for a cost),4
can be installed on corporate networks, or dedicated clusters, or can be hosted
on infrastructure clouds like Amazon EC2. In comparison, similar PaaS
services such as Google AppEngine [19] and Windows Azure [20] are in-house
platforms hosted on infrastructures owned by the respective companies. Aneka
was developed on Microsoft’s.NET Framework 2.0 and is compatible with
other implementations of the ECMA 335 standard [21], such as Mono. Aneka
4 http://www.manjrasoft.com
328
WORKFLOW ENGINE FOR CLOUDS


can run on popular platforms such as Microsoft Windows, Linux, and Mac OS
X, harnessing the collective computing power of a heterogeneous network.
The runtime environment consists of a collection of Aneka containers
running on physical or virtualized nodes. Each of these containers can be
conﬁgured to play a speciﬁc role such as scheduling or execution. The Aneka
distribution also provides a set of tools for administrating the cloud, reconﬁ-
guring nodes, managing users, and monitoring the execution of applications.
The Aneka service stack provides services for infrastructure management,
application execution management, accounting, licensing, and security. For
more information we refer you to Vecchiola et al. [14].
Aneka’s Dynamic Resource Provisioning service enables horizontal scaling
depending on the overall load in the cloud. The platform is thus elastic in
nature and can provision additional resources on-demand from external
physical or virtualized resource pools, in order to meet the QoS requirements
of applications. In a typical scenario, Aneka would acquire new virtualized
resources from external clouds such as Amazon EC2, in order to meet the
minimum waiting time of applications submitted to Aneka. Such a scenario
would arise when the current load in the cloud is high, and there is a lack of
available resources to timely process all jobs.
The development environment provides a rich set of APIs for developing
applications that can utilize free resources of the underlying infrastructure.
These APIs expose different programming abstractions, such as the task model,
thread model, and MapReduce [22]. The task programming model is of particular
Aneka
Container
Work units
Internet
Client
Client
Storage
Infrastructure
Executor
Executor
Executor
Scheduler
Work units
Client
Applications
Scheduler
Workers
FIGURE 12.3. A deployment of Aneka Enterprise Cloud.
12.5
UTILIZING CLOUDS FOR WORKFLOW EXECUTION
329


importance to the current discussion. It models “independent bag of tasks”
(BoT) applications that are composed of a collection of work units independent
of each other, and it may be executed in any given order. One of the beneﬁts of
the task programming model is its simplicity, making it easy to run legacy
applications on the cloud. An application using the task model composes one or
more task instances and forwards them as work units to the scheduler. The
scheduling service currently supports the First-In-First-Out, First-In-First-Out
with Backﬁlling, Clock-Rate Priority, and Preemption-Based Priority Queue
scheduling algorithms. The runtime environment also provides two specialized
services to support this model: the task scheduling service and the task execution
service.
The storage service provides a temporary repository for application ﬁles—
that is, input ﬁles that are required for task execution, and output ﬁles that are
he result of execution. Prior to dispatching work units, any ﬁles required
are staged-in to the storage service from the remote location. This remote
location can be either the client machine, a remote FTP server, or a cloud
storage service such as Amazon S3. The work units are then dispatched to
executors, which download the ﬁles before execution. Any output ﬁles
produced as a result of the execution are uploaded back to the storage service.
From here they are staged-out to the remote storage location.
12.5.2
Aneka Web Services
Aneka exposes three SOAP Web services for service negotiation, reservation,
and task submission, as depicted in Figure 12.4. The negotiation and reserva-
tion services work in concert, and they provide interfaces for negotiating
1. Task Submission Service
2. Negotiation Service
3. Reservation Service
SOAP Request
Aneka
Platform as a Service
SOAP Response
Aneka Web Services
FIGURE 12.4. Aneka Web services interface.
330
WORKFLOW ENGINE FOR CLOUDS


resource use and reserving them in Aneka for predetermined timeslots. As such,
these services are only useful when Aneka has limited resources to work with
and no opportunities for provisioning additional resources. The task Web
service provides a SOAP interface for executing jobs on Aneka. Based on the
task programming model, this service allows remote clients to submit jobs,
monitor their status, and abort jobs.
12.5.3
General Approach
Traditional WfMSs were designed with a centralized architecture and were thus
tied to a single machine. Moving workﬂow engines to clouds requires (a)
architectural changes and (b) integration of cloud management tools.
Architectural Changes. Most components of a WfMS can be separated from
the core engine so that they can be executed on different cloud services. Each
separated component could communicate with a centralized or replicated
workﬂow engine using events. The manager is responsible for coordinating
the distribution of load to its subcomponents, such as the Web server,
persistence, monitoring units, and so forth.
In our WfMS, we have separated the components that form the architecture
into the following: user interface, core, and plug-ins. The user interface can now
be coupled with a Web server running on a “large” instance of cloud that can
handle increasing number of users. The Web request from users accessing the
WfMS via a portal is thus ofﬂoaded to a different set of resources.
Similarly, the core and plug-in components can be hosted on different types
of instances separately. Depending on the size of the workload from users, these
components could be migrated or replicated to other resources, or reinforced
with additional resources to satisfy the increased load. Thus, employing
distributed modules of the WfMS on the basis of application requirements
helps scale the architecture.
Integration of Cloud Management Tools. As the WfMS is broken down
into components to be hosted across multiple cloud resources, we need a
mechanism to (a) access, transfer, and store data and (b) enable and monitor
executions
that
can
utilize
this
approach
of
scalable
distribution
of
components.
The cloud service provider may provide APIs and tools for discovering the
VM instances that are associated to a user’s account. Because various types of
instances can be dynamically created, their characteristics such as CPU
capacity and amount of available memory are a part of the cloud service
provider’s speciﬁcations. Similarly, for data storage and access, a cloud may
provide data sharing, data movement, and access rights management capabil-
ities to user’s applications. Cloud measurement tools may be in place to
account for the amount of data and computing power used, so that users are
charged on the pay-per-use basis. A WfMS now needs to access these tools
12.5
UTILIZING CLOUDS FOR WORKFLOW EXECUTION
331


to discover and characterize the resources available in the cloud. It also needs to
interpret the access rights (e.g., access control lists provided by Amazon),
use the data movement APIs, and share mechanisms between VMs to fully
utilize the beneﬁts of moving to clouds. In other words, traditional catalog
services such as the Globus Monitoring and Discovery Service (MDS) [23],
Replica Location Services, Storage Resource Brokers, Network Weather
Service [24], and so on could be easily replaced by more user-friendly and
scalable tools and APIs associated with a cloud service provider. We describe
some of these tools in the following section.
12.5.4
Tools for Utilizing Clouds in WfMS
The range of tools and services offered by cloud providers play an important
role in integrating WfMSs with clouds (Figure 12.5). Such services can facilitate
in the deployment, scaling, execution, and monitoring of workﬂow systems.
This section discusses some of the tools and services offered by various service
providers that can complement and support WfMSs.
A WfMS manages dynamic provisioning of compute and storage resources
in the cloud with the help of tools and APIs provided by service providers. The
provisioning is required to dynamically scale up/down according to application
requirements. For instance, data-intensive workﬂow applications may require
Aneka ASP.Net
Web Services
Azure Storage Service
Web Requests
Amazon S3
Big Table
Web Request
Aneka Enterprise Cloud
Other Aneka Client
applications
Resource Monitoring
Usage Data
IaaS (e.g. Amazon EC2, GoGrid)
Jobs
Resource
monitoring and
management
Application composition
and results
Real-time
resource
usage
Bills
SaaS
(e.g. Salesforce.com)
Usage Accounts
Management
Workflow Web App
Workflow Engine
FIGURE 12.5. A workﬂow utilizing multiple cloud services.
332
WORKFLOW ENGINE FOR CLOUDS


large amount of disk space for storage. A WfMS could provision dynamic
volumes of large capacity that could be shared across all instances of VMs
(similar to snapshots and volumes provided by Amazon). Similarly, for
compute-intensive tasks in an workﬂow, a WfMS could provision speciﬁc
instances that would help accelerate the execution of these compute-intensive
tasks.
A WfMS implements scheduling policies to assign tasks to resources based
on applications’ objectives. This task-resource mapping is dependent on several
factors: compute resource capacity, application requirements, user’s QoS, and
so forth. Based on these objectives, a WfMS could also direct a VM
provisioning system to consolidate data center loads by migrating VMs so
that it could make scheduling decisions based on locality of data and compute
resources.
A persistence mechanism is often important in workﬂow management
systems and for managing metadata such as available resources, job queues,
job status, and user data including large input and output ﬁles. Technologies
such as Amazon S3, Google’s BigTable, and the Windows Azure Storage
Services can support most storage requirements for workﬂow systems, while
also being scalable, reliable, and secure. If large quantities of user data are
being dealt with, such as a large number of brain images used in functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies [12], transferring them online can
be both expensive and time-consuming. In such cases, traditional post can
prove to be cheaper and faster. Amazon’s AWS Import/Export5 is one such
service that aims to speed up data movement by transferring large amounts of
data in portable storage devices. The data are shipped to/from Amazon and
ofﬂoaded into/from S3 buckets using Amazon’s high-speed internal network.
The cost savings can be signiﬁcant when transferring data on the order of
terabytes.
Most cloud providers also offer services and APIs for tracking resource
usage and the costs incurred. This can complement workﬂow systems that
support budget-based scheduling by utilizing real-time data on the resources
used, the duration, and the expenditure. This information can be used both for
making scheduling decisions on subsequent jobs and for billing the user at the
completion of the workﬂow application.6
Cloud services such as Google App Engine and Windows Azure provide
platforms for building scalable interactive Web applications. This makes it
relatively easy to port the graphical components of a workﬂow management
system to such platforms while beneﬁting from their inherent scalability and
reduced administration. For instance, such components deployed on Google
App Engine can utilize the same scalable systems that drive Google applica-
tions, including technologies such as BigTable [25] and GFS [26].
5 http://aws.amazon.com/importexport/
6 http://aws.amazon.com/devpay/
12.5
UTILIZING CLOUDS FOR WORKFLOW EXECUTION
333


12.6
CASE STUDY: EVOLUTIONARY MULTIOBJECTIVE
OPTIMIZATIONS
This section presents a scientiﬁc application workﬂow based on an iterative
technique for optimizing multiple search objectives, known as evolutionary
multiobjective optimization (EMO) [27]. EMO is a technique based on genetic
algorithms. Genetic algorithms are search algorithms used for ﬁnding optimal
solutions in a large space where deterministic or functional approaches are not
viable. Genetic algorithms use heuristics to ﬁnd an optimal solution that is
acceptable within a reasonable amount of time. In the presence of many
variables and complex heuristic functions, the time consumed in ﬁnding even an
acceptable solution can be too large. However, when multiple instances are run
in parallel in a distributed setting using different variables, the required time for
computation can be drastically reduced.
12.6.1
Objectives
The following are the objectives for modeling and executing an EMO workﬂow
on clouds:
 Design an execution model for EMO, expressed in the form of a workﬂow,
such that multiple distributed resources can be utilized.
 Parallelize the execution of EMO tasks for reducing the total completion
time.
 Dynamically provision compute resources needed for timely completion
of the application when the number of tasks increase.
 Repeatedly carry out similar experiments as and when required.
 Manage application execution, handle faults, and store the ﬁnal results for
analysis.
12.6.2
Workﬂow Solution
In order to parallelize the execution of EMO, we construct a workﬂow model
for systematically executing the tasks. A typical workﬂow structure is depicted
in Figure 12.6.
In our case study, the EMO application consists of ﬁve different topologies,
upon which the iteration is done. These topologies are deﬁned in ﬁve different
binary ﬁles. Each ﬁle becomes the input ﬁles for the top level tasks (A0emo1,
A0emo, . . . ). We create a separate branch for each topology ﬁle. In Figure 12.6,
there are two branches, which get merged on level 6. The tasks at the root level
operate on the topologies to create new population, which is then merged
by the task named “emomerge.” In Figure 12.6, we see two “emomerge” tasks
in the 2nd level, one task in the 6th level that merges two branches and then
splits the population to two branches again, two tasks on the 8th and 10th
334
WORKFLOW ENGINE FOR CLOUDS
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>


A0e…
Topology 1
Topology 2
Iteration 1
Iteration 2
A0e…
A0e…
A0e…
A0e…
A0e…
A1e…
A1e…
A1e…
Aem…
Bem…
A1e…
A1e…
A1e…
A1e…
A1e…
B0e…
B0e…
B1e…
B0e…
B1e…
B0e…
B1e…
B0e…
B1e…
B1e…
B0e…
B1e…
B0e…
B1e…
B0e…
B1e…
A0e…
A0e…
FIGURE 12.6. EMO workﬂow structure (boxes represent task, arrows represent data-
dependencies between tasks).
12.6
CASE STUDY: EVOLUTIONARY MULTIOBJECTIVE OPTIMIZATIONS
335


levels, and the ﬁnal task on the 12th level. In the example ﬁgure, each topology
is iterated two times in a branch before getting merged. The merged population
is then split. This split is done two times in the ﬁgure. The tasks labeled B0e and
B1e (depicted as darker shade in Figure 12.6) is the start of second iteration.
12.6.3
Deployment and Results
EMO Application. We use ZDT2 [27] as a test function for the objective
function. The workﬂow for this problem is depicted in Figure 12.6.
In our experiments, we carry out 10 iterations within a branch for 5 different
topologies. We merge and split the results of each of these branches 10 times.
For this scenario, the workﬂow constituted of a total of 6010 tasks. We varied
the tasks by changing the number of merges from 5 to 10. In doing so, the
structure and the characteristics of the tasks in the workﬂow would remain
unchanged. This is necessary for comparing the execution time when the
number of task increases from 1600 to 6000 when we alter the number of
merges from 5 to 10.
Compute Resource. We used 40 Amazon EC2 compute resources for
executing the EMO application. Twenty resources were instantiated at US-
east-1a, and 20 were instantiated at US-east-1d. Among these resources, one
was used for the workﬂow engine, one was used for Aneka’s master node and
the rest were worker nodes. The characteristics of these resources are listed in
Table 12.1.
The workﬂow engine, along with a database for persistence, the IBM TSpace
[28] based coordination server, and the Tomcat Web container, was instan-
tiated on a medium instance VM.
Output of EMO Application. After running the EMO workﬂow, we expect to
see optimized values for the two objectives given by the ZDT2 test function.
Figure 12.7 depicts the graph that plots the front obtained after iterating the
EMO workﬂow depicted in Figure 12.6. The front at Level 2 is not the optimal.
After ﬁrst iteration, the front is optimized. Iteration 2 does not signiﬁcantly
change the front, hence the overlapping of the data for Iteration 1 and 2.
Experimental Results When Using Clouds. Because the EMO workﬂow is
an iterative approach, increasing the number of iterations would increase the
quality of optimization in the results. Analogously, the greater the number of
tasks completing in the workﬂow, the greater the number of iterations, hence
the better the optimization.
Because the iterations can be carried out for an arbitrarily large number of
times, it is usually a best practice to limit the time for the overall calculation.
Thus, in our experiment we set the deadline to be 95 minutes. We then analyze
the number of tasks completing within the ﬁrst 95 minutes in two classes of
experiments.
336
WORKFLOW ENGINE FOR CLOUDS


Experiment 1: Seven Additional EC2 Instances Were Added. In this experi-
ment, we started executing the tasks in the EMO workﬂow initially using 20
EC2 compute resources (one node for workﬂow engine, one node for Aneka
master, 18 Aneka worker nodes). We instantiate seven more small instances to
increase the total number of resources to 25. They were available for use after
25 minutes of execution. At the end of 95 minutes, a total of 1612 tasks were
completed.
Experiment 2: Twenty Additional EC2 Instances Were Added. In this
experiment, we started executing the tasks in the EMO workﬂow using 20
TABLE 12.1. Characteristics of Amazon Compute Resources (EC2) Used
in Our Experiment
Characteristics
Aneka Master/Worker
Workﬂow Engine
Platform
Windows 2000 Server
Linux
CPU (type)
1 EC2 Compute Unitsa
(small)
5 EC2 Compute Unitsb
(medium)
Memory
1.7 GB
1.7 GB
Instance storage
160 GB
350GB
Instance location
US-east-1a (19)
US-east-1b(20)
US-east-1a
Number of instances
39
1
Price per hour
$US 0.12
$US 0.17
aSmall instance (default) 1.7 GB of memory, 1 EC2 compute unit (1 virtual core with 1 EC2
compute unit), 160 GB of instance storage, 32-bit platform.
bHigh-CPU medium instance 1.7 GB of memory, 5 EC2 compute units (2 virtual cores with 2.5 EC2
compute units each), 350 GB of instance storage, 32-bit platform.
Source: Amazon.
Evolutionary Multi-objective Optimization - 2 Objectives
Level  2, Iteration  0
Level  6, Iteration  1
Level  12, Iteration  2
1.2
1.1
1
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2 0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
FIGURE 12.7. A graph that plots the pareto-front obtained after executing EMO for
ZTD2 test problem.
12.6
CASE STUDY: EVOLUTIONARY MULTIOBJECTIVE OPTIMIZATIONS
337


EC2 compute resources, similar to Experiment 1. We instantiated 20 more EC2
instances after noticing the linear increase in task completion rate. These
instances however were available for use after 40 minutes of execution. At the
end of 95 minutes, a total of 3221 tasks were completed.
Analysis of the Results. In both experiments, the initial task completion rate
increased linearly until we started more instances, as depicted in Figure 12.8. As
the number of resources was increased, the rate of task completing increased
drastically. This is due to the submission of queued tasks in Aneka to the newly
available resources, which would have remained queued if resources were not
added.
In the ﬁgure, the completion rate curve rises up to a point until all the
queued tasks are submitted. The curve then rises gradually because the EMO
application is a workﬂow. Tasks in the workﬂow get submitted gradually as
their parents ﬁnish executions. Hence, the completion rate has similar slope
3600
3400
3200
3000
2800
2600
2400
2200
2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
0
5
10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
Timeline for the deadline of the application (minutes)
Dynamic scaling of EC2 Compute resources
7 VMs were added
20 VMs were added
Iterations represented by the number of tasks completing
55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95
Experiment 1
Experiment 2
FIGURE 12.8. Number of tasks completing in time as the number of compute resources
provisioned were increased at runtime.
338
WORKFLOW ENGINE FOR CLOUDS


as the initial rate, even after increasing the number of resources (30 to 45
minutes for Experiment 1; 45 to 70 minutes for Experiment 2). When more
tasks began completing as a result of adding new resources, the workﬂow
engine was able to submit additional tasks for execution. As a result, tasks
started competing for resources and hence were being queued by Aneka.
Because of this queuing at Aneka’s scheduler, the curve ﬂattens after 45
minutes for Experiment 1 and after 70 minutes for Experiment 2.
The most important beneﬁt of increasing the resources dynamically at
runtime is the increase in the total number of tasks completing, and hence
the quality of ﬁnal result. This is evident from the two graphs depicted in Figure
12.8. If a total of 25 resources were used, Experiment 1 would complete 1612
tasks by the end of the 95-minute deadline, whereas Experiment 2 would
complete executing nearly 3300 tasks within the same deadline if 20 additional
resources were added. The quality of results would be twice as good for
Experiment 2 as for Experiment 1. However, if a user wants to have the same
quality of output as in Experiment 1 but in much shorter time, he should
increase the number of resources used well before the deadline. A line just
above 1600 in Figure 12.8 depicts the cutoff point where the user could
terminate all the VM instances and obtain the same quality of results as
Experiment 1 would have obtained by running for 95 minutes. It took B45
minutes less time for Experiment 2 to execute the same number of tasks as
Experiment 1. This drastic reduction in time was seen even when both
experiments initially started with the same number of resources. In terms of
cost of provisioning additional resources, Experiment 2 is cheaper because
there are fewer overheads in time spent queuing and managing task submis-
sions, since the tasks would be submitted as soon as they arrive at Aneka’s
master node. If Amazon were to charge EC2 usage cost per minute rather than
per hour, Experiment 2 would save 45 minutes of execution time at the cost of
20 more resources.
We also analyzed the utilization of instantiated compute resources by
Aneka, as depicted in Figure 12.9. At the time of recording the graph, there
were 21 worker nodes in the Aneka cloud, with a combined power of 42 GHz.
FIGURE 12.9. Distributed compute resource utilized by Aneka network.
12.6
CASE STUDY: EVOLUTIONARY MULTIOBJECTIVE OPTIMIZATIONS
339


The graph shows a steep rise in the system utilization (labeled as usage in the
ﬁgure) as tasks were submitted for execution. The compute power available
(labeled as available) decreased to 4% with 80.8% memory available. This
decrease in utilization was due to the use of all the available resources for
execution of tasks submitted to Aneka by the workﬂow engine executing EMO
workﬂow.
12.7
VISIONARY THOUGHTS FOR PRACTITIONERS
The cloud computing paradigm is emerging and is being adopted at a rapid
rate. Gartner ranks it at the top of the hype cycle for the year 2010 [29]. As the
technology is being adopted by practitioners industry-wide, there are numerous
challenges to overcome. Moreover, these challenges could be addressed via a
realistic vision of the cloud computing models of the near future. This section
discusses some of them.
Software and service giants such as Google, Amazon, and Microsoft own
large data centers for providing a variety of cloud services to customers. These
independent and disparate initiatives would eventually lead to an interconnec-
tion model where users can choose a combination of services from different
providers in their applications. Our vision provides an entity responsible for
brokerage of resources across different cloud providers, termed the market
maker [16]. These inter-cloud environments would then facilitate executions of
workﬂow applications at distributed data centers. Large scientiﬁc experiments
would then be able to use inter-cloud resources, brokered through the market
maker.
The essence of using cloud services is to be able to dynamically scale the
applications running on top of it. Automating resource provisioning and VM
instance management in clouds based on multiobjectives (cost, time, and other
QoS parameters) can help achieve this goal. The automation process should be
transparent to the end users who would just be interested in running workﬂow
applications under their time and budget constraints. Users would specify
either ﬂexible or tight deadline for the cost they pay for using cloud services. It
becomes the responsibility of the workﬂow engine running in the cloud to
dynamically scale the application to satisfy multiple users0 request.
In order to facilitate fair but competitive use of cloud resources for workﬂow
applications, a service negotiation module must be in place. This entity would
negotiate with multiple service providers to match users0 requirements to a
service provider’s capabilities. Once a match is found, required resources can
then be allocated to the user application. A cloud market directory service is
needed to maintain a catalog of services from various cloud service providers.
Data and their communication play a vital role in any data-intensive workﬂow
application. When running such applications on clouds, storage and transfer
costs need to be taken into account in addition to the execution cost. The right
choice of compute location and storage service provider would result in
340
WORKFLOW ENGINE FOR CLOUDS


minimizing the total cost billed to a user. A cloud market maker could handle
these task and communication issues at the time of negotiation between various
cloud service providers.
12.8
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
In Section 12.7, we described some visions and inherent difﬁculties faced by
practitioners when using various cloud services. Drawing upon these visions,
we list below some future research directions in the form of broad research
directions:
 How to facilitate inter-cloud operations in terms of coherent data
exchange, task migration, and load balancing for workﬂow application.
 When and where to provision cloud resources so that workﬂow applica-
tions can meet their deadline constraints and also remain within their
budget.
 How to balance the use of cloud and local resources so that workﬂow
applications can meet their objectives.
 How to match workﬂow application requirements to any service provi-
der’s capabilities when there are numerous vendors with similar capabil-
ities in a cloud.
12.9
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
To summarize, we have presented a comprehensive description of using
workﬂow engine in cloud computing environments. We discussed the limita-
tions of existing workﬂow management systems and proposed changes that
need to be incorporated when moving to clouds. We also described cloud tools
that could help applications use cloud services.
To demonstrate a practical scenario of deploying a workﬂow engine in
clouds, we described in detail our workﬂow management system and a.NET-
based cloud computing platform, Aneka. We presented a case study of an
evolutionary multiobjective optimization algorithm. By modeling this applica-
tion in the form of a workﬂow, we obtained an order-of-magnitude improve-
ment in the application runtime when compute resources were provisioned at
runtime. Thousands of tasks were completed in a short period of time as
additional resources were provisioned, eventually decreasing the total runtime
of the application.
Based on our experience in using cloud services, we conclude that large
applications can certainly beneﬁt by using cloud resources. The key beneﬁts are
in terms of decreased runtime, on-demand resource provisioning, and ease of
resource management. However, these services come at a price whereby users
have to pay cloud service providers on the basis of the resource usage.
12.9
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
341


Although clouds offer many beneﬁts, they can’t and will not replace grids.
Clouds will augment grids. Users will use cloud services together with their in-
house solutions (cluster/enterprise grids) to enhance the performance of their
applications as and when needed.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work is partially supported through Australian Research Council (ARC)
Discovery Project grant. We would like to thank Christian Vecchiola from
University of Melbourne for his help in deﬁning the EMO application. We also
thank Adam Barker for reviewing and providing feedback on this chapter.
REFERENCES
1.
R. Buyya, S. Pandey, and C. Vecchiola, Cloudbus toolkit for market-oriented
cloud computing, in Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Cloud
Computing (CloudCom 2009, Springer, Germany), Beijing, China, December 14,
2009.
2.
J. Yu and R. Buyya, A taxonomy of workﬂow management systems for grid
computing, Journal of Grid Computing, 3(34):171200, 2005.
3.
DAGMan
Application.
http://www.cs.wisc.edu/condor/dagman/
(November
2009).
4.
T. Tannenbaum, D. Wright, K. Miller, and M. Livny. Condor—A distributed job
scheduler, in Beowulf Cluster Computing with Linux, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,
2002.
5.
E. Deelman, J. Blythe, Y. Gil, C. Kesselman, G. Mehta, and K. Vahi. Mapping
abstract complex workﬂows onto grid environments, Journal of Grid Computing, 1:
2539, 2003.
6.
B. Luda¨ scher, I. Altintas, C. Berkley, D. Higgins, E. Jaeger, M. Jones, E. A. Lee, J.
Tao, and Y. Zhao, Scientiﬁc workﬂow management and the Kepler system,
Concurrency and Computation: Practice and Experience, 18(10):10391065, 2006.
7.
T. Oinn, M. Addis, J. Ferris, D. Marvin, M. Senger, M. Greenwood, T. Carver, K.
Glover, M. R. Pocock, A. Wipat, and P. Li, Taverna: A tool for the composition
and enactment of bioinformatics workﬂows, in Bioinformatics, 20(17): 30453054,
2004.
8.
I. Foster and C. Kesselman (eds.), The Grid: Blueprint for a Future Computing
Infrastructure, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, San Francisco, 1999.
9.
R. Buyya, Economic-Based Distributed Resource Management and Scheduling for
Grid Computing,PhD Thesis, MonashUniversity, Melbourne, Australia, April2002.
10.
R. Buyya, D. Abramson, and J. Giddy, An economy driven resource management
architecture for global computational power grids, in Proceedings of the 7th
International Conference on Parallel and Distributed Processing Techniques and
Applications, Las Vegas, June 2629, 2000.
342
WORKFLOW ENGINE FOR CLOUDS


11.
E. Deelman, G. Singh, M. Livny, B. Berriman, and J. Good, The cost of doing
science on the cloud: the montage example, in Proceedings of the 2008 ACM/IEEE
Conference on Supercomputing, NJ, 2008, pp. 112.
12.
S. Pandey, W. Voorsluys, M. Rahman, R. Buyya, J. Dobson, and K. Chiu, A grid
workﬂow environment for brain imaging analysis on distributed systems, Con-
currency and Computation: Practice and Experience, 21(16):21182139, 2009.
13.
S. Venugopal, K. Nadiminti, H. Gibbins, and R. Buyya, Designing a resource
broker for heterogeneous grids, Software: Practice and Experience, 38(8): 793825,
2008.
14.
C. Vecchiola, X. Chu, and R. Buyya, Aneka: A software platform for .NET-based
cloud computing, in High Performance and Large Scale Computing, IOS Press,
Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2009.
15.
J. Yu and R. Buyya, Scheduling scientiﬁc workﬂow applications with deadline and
budget constraints using genetic algorithms, Scientiﬁc Programming Journal, 14
(34): 217230, 2006.
16.
Suraj Pandey, Linlin Wu, Siddeswara Guru, and Rajkumar Buyya, A Particle
Swarm Optimization (PSO)-based Heuristic for Scheduling Workﬂow Applica-
tions in Cloud Computing Environments, Proceedings of the 24th IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Advanced Information Networking and Applications (AINA
2010), Perth, Australia, April 2023, pp. 400407, 2010.  Best Paper Award.
17.
I. Raicu, Y. Zhao, I. Foster, and A. Szalay, Accelerating large-scale data
exploration through data diffusion, in Proceedings of the 2008 International
Workshop on Data-Aware Distributed Computing, ACM, 2008, pp. 918.
18.
C. Vecchiola, S. Pandey, and R. Buyya, High-performance cloud computing: A
view of scientiﬁc applications, in Proceedings of the 10th International Symposium
on Pervasive Systems, Algorithms and Networks Kaohsiung, Taiwan, December
1416, 2009.
19.
Google AppEngine, http://code.google.com/appengine/ (November 2009).
20.
Windows
Azure
Platform,
http://www.microsoft.com/windowsazure/window
sazure/ (November 2009).
21.
Standard ECMA-335, http://www.ecma-international.org/publications/standards/
Ecma-335.htm (November 2009).
22.
C. Jin and R. Buyya, MapReduce programming model for .NET-based cloud
computing, in Proceedings of the 15th International European Parallel Computing
Conference, Delft, The Netherlands, August 2528, 2009.
23.
K. Czajkowski, S. Fitzgerald, I. Foster, and C. Kesselman, Grid information
services for distributed resource sharing, in 10th IEEE International Symposium
on High Performance Distributed Computing, Los Alamitos, CA, 79 August 2001.
24.
R. Wolski, N. T. Spring, and J. Hayes. The network weather service: A distributed
resource performance forecasting service for metacomputing, Future Generation
Computer Systems, 15(56):757768, 1999.
25.
F. Chang, J. Dean, S. Ghemawat, W. C. Hsieh, D. A. Wallach, M. Burrows, T.
Chandra, A. Fikes, and R. E. Gruber, Bigtable: A distributed storage system for
structured data, in Proceedings of the 7th USENIX Symposium on Operating
Systems Design and Implementation, Berkeley, CA, USENIX Association, 2006,
p. 15.
REFERENCES
343


26.
S. Ghemawat, H. Gobioff, and S. T. Leung, The google ﬁle system, SIGOPS
Operating System Review, 37(5), 2003, 2943.
27.
C. Vecchiola, M. Kirley, and R. Buyya, Multi-objective problem solving with
offspring on enterprise clouds, in Proceedings of the 10th International Conference
on High-Performance Computing in Asia-Paciﬁc Region (HPC Asia 2009), Kaoh-
siung, Taiwan, March 25, 2009.
28.
IBM TSpaces, http://www.almaden.ibm.com/cs/tspaces/ (November 2009).
29.
Gartner’s Hype Cycle for 2009. http://www.gartner.com/technology/research/
hype-cycles/index.jsp (Accessed October, 2010).
344
WORKFLOW ENGINE FOR CLOUDS


CHAPTER 13
UNDERSTANDING SCIENTIFIC
APPLICATIONS FOR CLOUD
ENVIRONMENTS
SHANTENU JHA, DANIEL S. KATZ, ANDRE LUCKOW, ANDRE
MERZKY, and KATERINA STAMOU
13.1
INTRODUCTION
Distributed systems and their speciﬁc incarnations have evolved signiﬁcantly
over the years. Most often, these evolutionary steps have been a consequence of
external technology trends, such as the signiﬁcant increase in network/band-
width capabilities that have occurred. It can be argued that the single most
important driver for cloud computing environments is the advance in virtualiza-
tion technology that has taken place. But what implications does this advance,
leading to today’s cloud environments, have for scientiﬁc applications? The aim
of this chapter is to explore how clouds can support scientiﬁc applications.
Before we can address this important issue, it is imperative to (a) provide a
working model and deﬁnition of clouds and (b) understand how they differ
from other computational platforms such as grids and clusters. At a high level,
cloud computing is deﬁned by Mell and Grance [1] as a model for enabling
convenient, on-demand network access to a shared pool of conﬁgurable
computing resources (e.g., networks, servers, storage, applications, and ser-
vices) that can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal management
effort or service provider interaction.
We view clouds not as a monolithic isolated platform but as part of a large
distributed ecosystem. But are clouds a natural evolution of distributed
systems, or are they a fundamental new paradigm? Prima facie, cloud concepts
are derived from other systems, such as the implicit model of clusters as static
Cloud Computing: Principles and Paradigms,
Edited by Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg and
Andrzej Goscinski
Copyright r 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
345


bounded sets of resources, which leads to batch-queue extensions to virtualiza-
tion. Another example is provided by ideas prevalent in grids to address
dynamic application requirements and resource capabilities, such as pilot jobs,
that are being redesigned and modiﬁed for clouds. In either case, clouds are an
outgrowth of the systems and ideas that have come before them, and we want
to consciously consider our underlying assumptions, to make sure we are not
blindly carrying over assumptions about previous types of parallel and
distributed computing.
We believe that there is novelty in the resource management and capacity
planning capabilities for clouds. Thanks to their ability to provide an illusion of
unlimited and/or immediately available resources, as currently provisioned,
clouds in conjunction with traditional HPC and HTC grids provide a balanced
infrastructure supporting scale-out and scale-up, as well as capability (HPC) and
quick turn-around (HTC) computing for a range of application (model) sizes and
requirements. The novelty in resource management and capacity planning
capabilities is likely to inﬂuence changes in the usage mode, as well deployment
and execution management/planning. The ability to exploit these attributes could
lead to applications with new and interesting usage modes and dynamic execution
on clouds and therefore new application capabilities. Additionally, clouds are
suitable infrastructure for dynamic applications—that is, those with execution
time resource requirements that cannot be determined exactly in advance, either
due to changes in runtime requirements or due to interesting changes in
application structure (e.g., different solver with different resource requirement).
Clouds will have a broad impact on legacy scientiﬁc applications, because we
anticipate that many existing legacy applications will adapt to and take
advantage of new capabilities. However, it is unclear if clouds as currently
presented are likely to change (many of) the fundamental reformulation of the
development of scientiﬁc applications. In this chapter, we will thus focus on
scientiﬁc applications that can beneﬁt from a dynamic execution model that we
believe can be facilitated by clouds. Not surprisingly, and in common with
many distributed applications, coarse-grained or task-level parallelism is going
to be the basis of many programming models aimed at data-intensive science
executing in cloud environments. However, even for common programming
approaches such as MapReduce (based on task-level parallelism), the ability
to incorporate dynamic resource placement and management as well as
dynamic datasets is an important requirement with concomitant performance
advantages. For example, the Map and Reduce phases involve different
computations, thus different loads and resources; dynamical formulations of
applications are better suited to supporting such load-balancing. Clouds are
thus emerging as an important class of distributed computational resource, for
both data-intensive and compute-intensive applications.
There are novel usage modes that can be supported when grids and clouds
are used concurrently. For example, the usage of clouds as the computational
equivalent of a heat bath establishes determinism—that is, well-bounded time-
to-completion with concomitant advantages that will accrue as a consequence.
346
UNDERSTANDING SCIENTIFIC APPLICATIONS FOR CLOUD ENVIRONMENTS


But to support such advanced usage modes, there is a requirement for
programming systems, models, and abstractions that enable application devel-
opers to express decompositions and which support dynamic execution. Many
early cloud applications employ ad hoc solutions, which results in a lack of
generality and the inability of programs to be extensible and independent of
infrastructure details. The IDEAS design objectives—Interoperability, Distrib-
uted scale-out, Extensibility, Adaptivity, and Simplicity—summarize the design
goals for distributed applications. In this chapter we demonstrate several
examples of how these objectives can be accomplished using several cloud
applications that use SAGA.
13.1.1
Fundamental Issues
In this chapter, we want to consider a set of fundamental questions about
scientiﬁc applications on clouds, such as: What kind of scientiﬁc applications
are suitable for clouds? Are there assumptions that were made in developing
applications for grids that should consciously be thrown out, when develop-
ing applications for clouds? In other words, from an application’s perspective,
how is a cloud different from a traditional grid? What kind of scientiﬁc
applications can utilize both clouds and grids, and under what conditions?
The issue of how applications and environments are developed is a chicken-
and-egg situation. One might ask which applications are suitable for a given
environment. Similarly, one might ask which environment can support a
given application. Applications are developed to run in speciﬁc environments,
while environments are developed to run speciﬁc applications. This coupling
is a Zen-like paradox.
Clouds as a Type of Distributed Infrastructure. Before we can analyze if
there is a fundamentally different class of applications that can be supported on
cloud systems, it is imperative to ask, What is the difference between clouds and
other distributed infrastructure?
To structure the differences between grid and cloud applications, if any, let
us use the three phases of an applications life cycle: (i) development, (ii)
deployment, and (iii) execution [2]. In development, if we think of the three
vectors (execution unit, communication, and coordination) aiding our analysis,
then neither resource management or scheduling inﬂuence the above three
vector values. In deployment, clouds can be clearly differentiated from clusters
and grids. Speciﬁcally, the runtime environment [as deﬁned by the virtual
machine (VM)] is controlled by the user/application and can be set up as such;
this is in contrast to traditional computational environments. By providing
simplicity and ease of management, it is hoped that the changes at the execution
level may feed back to the application development level.
Some uncertainty lies in the fact that there are some things we understand,
while there are some things that are dependent on evolving technologies and are
thus unclear. For example, at the execution level, clouds differ from clusters/
13.1
INTRODUCTION
347


grids in at least a couple of different ways. In cloud environments, user-level
jobs are not typically exposed to a scheduling system; a user-level job consists of
requesting the instantiation of a VM. Virtual machines are either assigned to
the user or not (this is an important attribute that provides the illusion of
inﬁnite resources). The assignment of a job to a VM must be done by the user
(or a middleware layer). In contrast, user-level jobs on grids and clusters are
exposed to a scheduling system and are assigned to execute at a later stage. Also
a description of a grid/cluster job typically contains an explicit workload
description. In contrast, for clouds, a user-level job typically contains the
container (a description of the resource requested) but does not necessarily
contain the workload itself. In other words, the physical resources are not
provisioned to the workload but are provisioned to the container. This model is
quite similar to resource reservations where one can obtain a “container” of
resources to which jobs can be later be bound. Interestingly, at this level of
formulation, pilot jobs can be considered to provide a model of resource
provisioning similar to the one that clouds natively provide.
An additional issue is compositional and deployment ﬂexibility. A number
of applications are difﬁcult to build, due to runtime dependencies or compli-
cated nonportable build systems. There is often a need to control the runtime
environment at a ﬁne-grained level, which is often difﬁcult with grids; this often
provides a rationale for using cloud environments. Clouds offer an opportunity
to build virtual machines once, then to load them on various systems, working
around issues related to portability on the physical systems, because the VM
images can be static, while real systems (both hardware and software) are often
changing.
A third issue is scheduling ﬂexibility. Clouds offer the ability to create usage
modes for applications to support the situation where, when the set of resources
needed to run an application changes (perhaps rapidly), the resources can
actually be changed (new resources can be added, or existing resources can be
removed from the pool used by the job).
Scientiﬁc Cloud Applications as Distributed Applications. We have
previously [2] introduced the concept of Distributed Application Vectors to
structure the analysis and understanding of the main characteristics with a view
to understanding the primary design requirements and constraints. Speciﬁcally,
we determined that understanding the execution units, communication require-
ments, coordination mechanisms, and execution environment of a distributed
application was a necessary (minimally complete) set of requirements. We will
argue that both the vectors and the abstractions (patterns) for cloud-based
applications are essentially the same as those for grid-based applications,
further lending credibility to the claim that cloud-based applications are of
the broader distributed applications class.
Most applications have been modiﬁed to utilize clouds. Usually, the
modiﬁcations have not been at the application level, but more at the point at
which the application uses the infrastructure. It appears that there is not a
348
UNDERSTANDING SCIENTIFIC APPLICATIONS FOR CLOUD ENVIRONMENTS


major distinction between a classic grid application or a scientiﬁc cloud
application; they are both incarnations of distributed applications—with the
same development concerns and requirements, but with different deployment
and execution contexts. In other words: Cloud applications are essentially a
type of distributed applications, but with different infrastructure usage than
grid applications. Due to a better control on the software environment, there is
the ability to do some things better on clouds; thus, some types of applications
are better suited/adapted to clouds. Programming models, such as MapReduce,
that support data-intensive applications are not exclusively cloud-based, but
due to the programming systems and tools as well as other elements of the
ecosystem, they are likely to ﬁnd increased utilization. Thus, at this level, there
are no fundamental new development paradigms for cloud-based applications a
priori.
We also formally characterized [2] patterns that can be used to capture
aspects of distributed coordination, communication, and execution. Speciﬁcally,
we identiﬁed three important elements (“vectors”) inﬂuencing the overall
development of distributed applications, coordination, communication, and
execution and showed how these and data access patterns can be associated
with a primary distributed application concern (reproduced and extended in
Table 13.1).
We will discuss how using cloud capabilities will enable applications to exploit
new scenarios, for example, the dynamic adjustment of application parameters
(such as the accuracy) or the dynamic addition of new resources to an
application. In order to motivate and structure these applications and their
usage modes, we will provide a brief overview of a classiﬁcation of scientiﬁc cloud
applications in the next section. We will then discuss SAGA, which is an API for
distributed applications as a viable programming system for clouds. We establish
this with three distinct applications that have been developed for clouds using
SAGA, further bolstering the connection between cloud applications and
distributed applications. We end this chapter with a discussion of issues of
relevance to scientiﬁc applications on clouds—including design objectives,
interoperability with grids, and application performance considerations.
TABLE 13.1. A Classiﬁcation of Some Commonly Occurring Patterns
in Distributed Computing.a
Coordination
Communication
Deployment
Data Access
Client-server
Pub-sub
Replication
Co-access
P2P
Stream
At-home
One-to-one
Master-worker (TF, BoT)
Point-to-point
Brokering
One-to-many
Consensus
Broadcast
Co-allocation
Scatter-gather
Data processing pipeline
All-to-all
aThe patterns are placed into a category that represents the predominant context in which they
appear and address; this is not to imply that each pattern addresses only one issue exclusively.
Source: Adapted from Jha et al. [2].
13.1
INTRODUCTION
349


13.2
A CLASSIFICATION OF SCIENTIFIC APPLICATIONS
AND SERVICES IN THE CLOUD
Common models of clouds [1,3,4] introduce composite hierarchies of different
layers, each implementing a different service model (see Figure 13.1). The
services of each layer can be composed from the services of the layer under-
neath, and each layer may include one or more services that share the same or
equivalent levels of abstraction. The proposed layers consist of the following:
the Software as a Service (SaaS) layer, the platform as a service (PaaS) layer,
and the Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) layer. The IaaS layer can be further
divided into the computational resources, storage, and communications sub-
layers, the software kernel layer, and the hardware/ﬁrmware layer that consists
of the actual physical system components. As shown in Figure 13.1, clouds can
also be classiﬁed according to their deployment model into public and private
clouds. A public cloud is generally available on pay-per-use basis. Several
infrastructures have emerged that enable the creation of so-called private
clouds—that is, clouds that are only accessible from within an organization.
Based on the proposed service layers, we will derive a classiﬁcation from the
application’s perspective, with our aim to provide suggestions and raise further
discussions on how scientiﬁc applications could possibly foster in the cloud
SaaS
Google Apps
Salesforce
Amazon Elastic
MapReduce
Amazon EC2
Bio
Ensemble
Bio
Ensemble
SAGA
MapReduce
TG Science
Portal
Montage
Montage
SAGA
MapReduce
Comput.
Drug Disc.
Amazon S3
Public
Google
AppEngine
Windows
Azure
Hadoop
(MapReduce)
Dryad
Portal
Eucalyptus
Nimbus
Private Clouds/
Cloud-like Infrastructure
PaaS
IaaS
FIGURE 13.1. Cloud taxonomy and application examples: Clouds provide services at
different levels (IaaS, PaaS, SaaS). The amount of control available to users and
developers decreases with the level of abstraction. According to their deployment model,
clouds can be categorized into public and private clouds.
350
UNDERSTANDING SCIENTIFIC APPLICATIONS FOR CLOUD ENVIRONMENTS


environment. Although our taxonomy is targeted toward speciﬁc cloud
environments, we strongly believe that a scientiﬁc application should and
must remain interoperable regardless of the execution backend or the initial
development infrastructure.
The identiﬁcation of how cloud application services ﬁt into the layers may
allow software developers to better comprehend the nature of parameters
introduced in each layer. Such an assumption could lead into easier and more
efﬁcient implementation of cloud-operable scientiﬁc applications. Research
work from the traditional cluster/grid era systems has already determined
important features like scalability, extensibility, and high availability that
should play an integral role in a distributed application’s core functionality.
Before we discuss scientiﬁc cloud applications in Section 13.3, here we will
explain the details of the layers in the cloud model.
13.2.1
Software as a Service (SaaS) Layer
The software as a service layer is the highest layer in the proposed model. SaaS
provides ready-to-run services that are deployed and conﬁgured for the user. In
general, the user has no control over the underlying cloud infrastructure with
the exception of limited conﬁguration settings. Regarding scientiﬁc applica-
tions, such a layer may represent an access point for the end user to reach a
service, like a portal or a visualization tool. Scientiﬁc portals have been used by
many grid services.
A strong characteristic of SaaS services is that there is no client side software
requirement. All data manipulated in such systems are held in remote infra-
structures where all the processing takes place. One of the most prominent
advantages of applications that are presented in this layer is universal
accessibility regardless of the client system’s software availability. This scheme
provides ﬂexibility to the end user and transparency of any complex mechanism
involved. Some widely used examples of services that belong to this category
are Google Apps and Salesforce. A prominent example from the science
community is the TeraGrid Science Gateways [5].
These gateways provide among other things several domain speciﬁc web
portals, which can be used to access computational and data services.
13.2.2
Platform as a Service (PaaS) Layer
The Platform as a Service (PaaS) layer provides the capability to deploy custom
applications on the cloud providers infrastructure. These applications are
developed using the programming languages and APIs deﬁned by the cloud
provider. Similar to SaaS, the user has only limited control over the underlying
cloud infrastructures: He can deploy and conﬁgure applications created using
the vendor’s programming environment. The process of implementing and
deploying a cloud application becomes more accessible while allowing the
programmer to focus on important issues like the formulation of the scientiﬁc
13.2
A CLASSIFICATION OF SCIENTIFIC APPLICATIONS AND SERVICES IN THE CLOUD
351


algorithm. A developer does not have to worry about complex programming
details, scalability, load balancing, or other system issues that may hinder the
overall process of building an application. All such criteria are already speciﬁed
by the given API that abstracts underlying architectural parameters.
A well-known PaaS example is the Google App Engine [6] that equips
developers with a Python and Java API and runtime environment for the
implementation of web applications. Windows Azure [7] is Microsoft’s PaaS
platform and offers different types of runtime environments and storage
services for applications. While, in particular, Google App Engine is primarily
geared toward Web applications (such as science portals), Windows Azure is
also well-suited for compute- and data-intensive applications. Watson et al. [8]
use Windows Azure—in particular the data storage and VM execution
environment—to conduct data mining for computational drug discovery.
Another PaaS abstraction that is used for parallel processing of large
amounts of data is MapReduce (MR) [9]. The framework solely requires the
user to deﬁne two functions: the map and the reduce function. Both functions
operate on key/value pairs: The map function transforms an input key/value
pair representing a data row to an output key/value pair; the reduce function is
used to merge all outputs of the map functions. Generally, the MapReduce
framework handles all complexities and orchestrates the distribution of the
the data as well as of the map and reduce tasks. Hadoop [10] is a well-
known example of an open-source MapReduce framework. Amazon’s Elastic
MapReduce [11] provides a hosted MapReduce service.
Another example of an environment for data-intensive computing is
Microsoft Dryad [12]. The framework allows the programmer to efﬁciently
use resources for running data parallel applications. In Dryad a computation
has the form of a directed graph (DAG), where the program instances that
compose the computation are represented as graph vertices and the one-way
communication channels between the instances are represented as graph edges.
The Dryad infrastructure includes computational frameworks like Google’s
MapReduce. A port of Dryad to Windows Azure is planned, but at the time of
writing is not available.
PaaS clouds provider higher-level abstractions for cloud applications, which
usually simpliﬁes the application development process and removes the need to
manage the underlying software and hardware infrastructure. PaaS offers
automatic scalability, load balancing, and failure tolerance. However, the
beneﬁts are also associated with some drawbacks: Generally, PaaS services
usually provide highly proprietary environments with only limited standard
support. App Engine, for example, supports parts of the Java Enterprise API,
but uses a custom BigTable-based [13] data store.
13.2.3
Infrastructure-as-a-Service Layer
The infrastructure-as-a-service (Iaas) layer provides low-level, virtualized
resources, such as storage, networks, and other fundamental computing
352
UNDERSTANDING SCIENTIFIC APPLICATIONS FOR CLOUD ENVIRONMENTS


resources via self-services to the user. In general, the user can deploy and run
arbitrary software, which usually includes operating systems as well as
applications. However, the user has no knowledge of the exact location and
speciﬁcs of the underlying physical resources. Cloud providers usually offer
instant elasticity; that is, new resources can be rapidly and elastically provi-
sioned to scale-up or scale-out applications dynamically.
Computational cloud resources are represented through virtual machine
instances (VMs), where the user is usually granted full administrative access
and has the ability to build and deploy any kind of service infrastructure. Such
VMs usually come with an OS already installed. The developer may choose a
VM to rent that has the OS she wants. Amazon EC2 [14] is the prime example
of such a service and currently offers a variety of VM images, where one may
choose to work on a Windows platform or on some Linux-based platforms.
The developer can further conﬁgure and add extra libraries to the selected OS
to accommodate an application. Rackspace [15] and GoGrid [16] provide
similar services. Eucalyptus [17] and Nimbus [18] offer EC2 compatible
infrastructures, which can be deployed in-house in a private cloud. Several
scientiﬁc clouds utilize these frameworks—for example, Science Cloud [19] and
Future Grid [20].
VMs are provided to the user under SLAs, where the cloud provider
guarantees a certain level of system’s performance to their clients. They usually
involve fees on behalf of the user utilizing the leased computational resources,
while open source/research cloud infrastructures don’t include any ﬁnancial
requirement. When a team of scientists rents some virtual resources to run their
experiments, they usually also lease data storage to store their data/results
remotely and access them within the time limits of their agreement with the
service provider. Examples of public cloud storage service are Amazon S3 [21]
and Rackspace Cloud Files [22]. Walrus [23] is a S3 interface compatible
service, which can be deployed on private cloud infrastructures. Another
common cloud-like infrastructure is distributed ﬁle systems, such as the Google
File System (GFS) [24] and the Hadoop File System (HDFS) [25]. Both systems
are optimized for storing and retrieving large amounts of data.
13.2.4
Discussion of Cloud Models
Several scientiﬁc applications from different domains (e.g., life sciences, high-
energy physics, astrophysics, computational chemistry) have been ported to
cloud environments (see references 2628 for examples). The majority of these
applications rely on IaaS cloud services and solely utilize static execution modes:
A scientist leases some virtual resources in order to deploy their testing services.
One may select different number of instances to run their tests on. An instance of
a VM is perceived as a node or a processing unit. There can be a multiple number
of instances under the same VM, depending on the SLA one has agreed on. Once
the service is deployed, a scientist can begin testing on the virtual nodes; this is
similar to how one would use a traditional set of local clusters.
13.2
A CLASSIFICATION OF SCIENTIFIC APPLICATIONS AND SERVICES IN THE CLOUD
353


Furthermore, most of this research has solely attempted to manually
customize legacy scientiﬁc applications in order to accommodate them into a
cloud infrastructure. Benchmark tests on both EC2 virtual instances and
conventional computational clusters indicated no signiﬁcant difference in the
results with respect to total running time (wall clock) and number of processors
used. So far, there hasn’t been much discussions on implementing scientiﬁc
applications targeted to a cloud infrastructure. Such ﬁrst-principle applications
require programatic access to cloud capabilities as dynamic provisioning in an
infrastructure-independent way to support dynamic execution modes.
In summary, clouds provide services at different levels (IaaS, PaaS, SaaS). In
general, the amount of control available to users and developers decreases with
the level of abstraction. Only IaaS provides sufﬁcient programmatic control to
express decompositions and dynamic execution modes, which seems central
to many scientiﬁc applications.
13.3
SAGA-BASED SCIENTIFIC APPLICATIONS
THAT UTILIZE CLOUDS
In this chapter we take the scope of “cloud applications” to be those distributed
applications that are able to explicitly beneﬁt from the cloud’s inherent
elasticity—where elasticity is a kind of dynamic execution mode—and from
the usage modes provided by clouds. This excludes those applications that are
trivially mapped to a small static set of small resources, which can of course be
provided by clouds but do not really capture the predominant advantages and
features of clouds.
Earlier work of the chapter authors [28] has shown that the Simple API for
Grid Applications (SAGA) [29] provides a means to implement ﬁrst-principle
distributed applications. Both the SAGA standard [30] and the various SAGA
implementations [31,32] ultimately strive to provide higher-level programming
abstractions to developers, while at the same time shielding them from the
heterogeneity and dynamics of the underlying infrastructure. The low-level
decomposition of distributed applications can thus be expressed via the
relatively high-level SAGA API.
SAGA has been used to develop scientiﬁc applications that can utilize an
ever-increasing set of infrastructure, ranging from vanilla clouds such as EC2,
to “open source” clouds based upon Eucalyptus, to regular HPC and HTC
grids, as well to a proposed set of emerging “special-purpose” clouds. SAGA
has also been used in conjunction with multiple VM management systems such
as OpenNebula (work in progress) and Condor (established). In those cases
where the application decomposition properties can be well-mapped to the
respective underlying cloud and its usage usage modes (as discussed before), the
resulting applications are ﬁt to utilize cloud environments. In other words, if
clouds can be deﬁned as elastic distributed systems that support speciﬁc usage
modes, then it seems viable to expect explicit application level support for those
354
UNDERSTANDING SCIENTIFIC APPLICATIONS FOR CLOUD ENVIRONMENTS


usage modes, in order to allow applications to express that usage mode in the
ﬁrst place.
If we now consider the variety of scientiﬁc applications (see reference 2), it
seems clear that (i) no single usage mode will be able to accommodate them all
and (ii) no single programming abstraction will be able to cover their full scope.
Instead, we see a continuum of requirements and solutions that try to map the
application structure to the speciﬁc distributed runtime environment. This is
exactly where SAGA tries to contribute: It provides a framework for imple-
menting higher-level programming abstractions (where it does not provide
those abstractions itself), each expressing or demanding a certain usage mode.
The SAGA layer allows to abstract the speciﬁc way in which that usage mode is
provided—either implicitly by adding additional structure to the distributed
environment, or explicitly by exploiting support for that usage mode, for
example, the elasticity in a speciﬁc cloud.
This section will discuss several SAGA-based scientiﬁc cloud applications,
but we assert that the discussion holds just as well for applications that express
their decomposition in other ways programatically. We do not claim that
SAGA is the ultimate approach to develop cloud applications, but given our
experience so far, it at least seems to be a viable approach that allows
applications to directly beneﬁt from the features that clouds, as speciﬁc
distributed environments, provide: (a) support for speciﬁc usage modes and
(b) elasticity of resources. Below we will present a number of examples that
illustrate and verify that approach.
13.3.1
MapReduce
As discussed in Section 13.2, MapReduce (MR) is a prominent example for a
PaaS: The MR framework allows users to (a) deﬁne their own speciﬁc map and
reduce algorithms and (b) utilize the respective PaaS infrastructure with its MR
supporting usage modes (elasticity, communication, etc.). With the emergence
of the currently observed broad spectrum of cloud infrastructures, it became,
however, necessary to implement the MR framework for each of them.
Furthermore, MR has traditionally not been heavily used by the scientiﬁc
computation community, so that efﬁcient implementations on the “legacy” grid
and cluster platforms have been largely missing, which raises the barrier for
adoption of MR for scientiﬁc applications.
The SAGA MapReduce [33] provides a MR development and runtime
environment that is implemented using the SAGA. The main advantage of a
SAGA-based approach is that it is infrastructure-independent while still
providing a maximum of control over the deployment, distribution, and
runtime decomposition. In particular, the ability to control the distribution
and placement of the computation units (workers) is critical in order to
implement the ability to move computational work to the data. This is required
to keep data network transfer low and, in the case of commercial clouds, the
monetary cost of computing the solution low.
13.3
SAGA-BASED SCIENTIFIC APPLICATIONS THAT UTILIZE CLOUDS
355
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>


Figure 13.2 show the architecture of the SAGA MR framework. Several
SAGA adaptors have been developed to utilize SAGA MapReduce seamlessly
on different grid and cloud infrastructures [28]. For this purpose, adaptors for
the SAGA job and ﬁle package are provided. The SAGA job API is used to
orchestrate mapping and reduction tasks, while the ﬁle API is utilized to access
data. In addition to the local adaptors for testing, we use the Globus adaptors
for grids and the AWS adaptors for cloud environments. Furthermore, we
provide various adaptors for cloud-like infrastructure, such as different open-
source distributed ﬁle systems (e.g., HDFS [25] and CloudStore [34]), and key/
value stores (e.g., HBase [35]).
Tables 13.2 and 13.3 show some selected performance data for SAGA
MapReduce; further details can be found in references 28 and 33. These tests
established interoperability across a range of distinct infrastructure concur-
rently. Ongoing work is currently adding dynamic resource placement and job
management to the framework, and it is also experimenting with automated
data/compute colocation. The SAGA-based MapReduce implementation has
shown to be easily applicable to sequence search applications, which in turn can
make excellent use of the MapReduce algorithm and of a variety of middleware
backends.
13.3.2
SAGA Montage
Montage [36, 37], an astronomical image mosaicking application that is also
one of the most commonly studied workﬂow applications, has also been
studied [38] with SAGA. Montage is designed to take multiple astronomical
SAGA-based MapReduce
Advert Package
File Package
Remote (Slave) Jobs
SAGA
Register
Work Items
SAGA
PostgreSQL
HBase
GridFTP
Hadoop
...
...
MapReduce
Input data
Master
GRAM
Condor
Map
Client
Reduce
Client
Install and
Launch
Clients
Map(1)
Job Package
SAGA
Config.
Data
Description
(XML)
SAGA
Reduce(2)
FIGURE 13.2. SAGA MapReduce framework. A master-worker paradigm is used to
implement the MapReduce pattern. The diagram shows several different infrastructure
options that can be utilized by the application.
356
UNDERSTANDING SCIENTIFIC APPLICATIONS FOR CLOUD ENVIRONMENTS


TABLE 13.2. Performance Data for Different Conﬁgurations of Worker Placementsa
Number of workers
Data
Size (MB)
TS
(sec)
TSpawn
(sec)
TS 2
TSpawn (sec)
TeraGrid
AWS
4
—
10
8.8
6.8
2.0
—
1
10
4.3
2.8
1.5
—
2
10
7.8
5.3
2.5
—
3
10
8.7
7.7
1.0
—
4
10
13.0
10.3
2.7
—
4 (1)
10
11.3
8.6
2.7
—
4 (2)
10
11.6
9.5
2.1
—
2
100
7.9
5.3
2.6
—
4
100
12.4
9.2
3.2
—
10
100
29.0
25.1
3.9
—
4 (1)
100
16.2
8.7
7.5
—
4 (2)
100
12.3
8.5
3.8
—
6 (3)
100
18.7
13.5
5.2
—
8 (1)
100
31.1
18.3
12.8
—
8 (2)
100
27.9
19.8
8.1
—
8 (4)
100
27.4
19.9
7.5
aThe master places the workers either on clouds or on the TeraGrid (TG). The conﬁgurations,
separated by horizontal lines, are classiﬁed as either all workers on the TG or having all workers on
EC2. For the latter, unless otherwise explicitly indicated by a number in parentheses, every worker
is assigned to a unique VM. In the ﬁnal set of rows, the number in parentheses indicates the number
of VMs used. It is interesting to note the signiﬁcant spawning times, and its dependence on the
number of VM, which typically increase with the number of VMs. TSpawn does not include
instantiation of the VM.
TABLE 13.3. Performance Data for Different Conﬁgurations of Worker Placements on
TG, EucalyptusCloud, and EC2.a
Number of Workers
Size
(MB)
TS
(sec)
TSpawn
(sec)
TS 2
TSpawn (sec)
TG
AWS
Eucalyptus
—
1
1
10
5.3
3.8
1.5
—
2
2
10
10.7
8.8
1.9
—
1
1
100
6.7
3.8
2.9
—
2
2
100
10.3
7.3
3.0
1
—
1
10
4.7
3.3
1.4
1
—
1
100
6.4
3.4
3.0
2
2
—
10
7.4
5.9
1.5
3
3
—
10
11.6
10.3
1.6
4
4
—
10
13.7
11.6
2.1
5
5
—
10
33.2
29.4
3.8
10
10
—
10
33.2
28.8
2.4
aThe ﬁrst set of data establishes cloudcloud interoperability. The second set (rows 511) shows
interoperability between grids and clouds (EC2). The experimental conditions and measurements
are similar to those in Table 13.2.
13.3
SAGA-BASED SCIENTIFIC APPLICATIONS THAT UTILIZE CLOUDS
357


images (from telescopes or other instruments) and stitch them together into a
mosaic that appears to be from a single instrument.
Montage initially focused on being scientiﬁcally accurate and useful to
astronomers, without being concerned about computational efﬁciency, and it is
being used by many production science instruments and astronomy projects
[39]. Montage was envisioned to be customizable, so that different astronomers
could choose to use all, much, or some of the functionality, and so that they
could add their own code if so desired. For this reason, Montage is a set of
modules or tools, each an executable program, that can run on a single
computer, a parallel system, or a distributed system. The ﬁrst version of
Montage used a script to run a series of these modules on a single processor,
with some modules being executed multiple times on different data. A Montage
run is a set of tasks, each having input and output data, and many of the tasks
are the same executable run on different data, referred to as a stage.
Later Montage releases delivered two new execution modes, suitable for grid
and also cloud environments [40], in addition to sequentially execution. First,
each stage can be wrapped by an MPI executable that calls the tasks in that
stage in a round-robin manner across the available processors. Second, the
Montage workﬂow can be described as a directed acyclic graph (DAG), and
this DAG can be executed on a grid. In the released version of Montage, this
is done by mDAG, a Montage module that produces an abstract DAG (or
A-DAG, where abstract means that no speciﬁc resources are assigned to
execute the DAG), Pegasus [41, 42], which communicates with grid information
systems and maps the abstract DAG to a concrete resource assignment,
creating a concrete DAG (or C-DAG), and DAGMan [43], which executes
C-DAG nodes on their internally speciﬁed resources.
The generality of Montage as a workﬂow application has led it to become an
exemplar for those in the computer science workﬂow community, such as those
working on: Pegasus, ASKALON [44], quality-of-service (QoS)-enabled
GridFTP [45], SWIFT [46], SCALEA-G [47], VGrADS [48], and so on.
A lot of interesting work has been done around the accommodation of
workﬂow and generally data-intensive applications into the cloud. Such appli-
cations have a large amount and number of data dependencies, which are usually
represented using a DAG to deﬁne the sequence of those dependencies. Different
approaches have been used to test how well a traditional application like
Montage could ﬁt in and utilize virtual resources without compromising any
of its functionality or performance [49], including a SAGA-based workﬂow
system, called “digedag,” has been developed. This allows one to run Montage
applications on a heterogeneous set of backends, with acceptable performance
penalties [38]. Individual nodes of Montage workﬂows are usually sequential
(i.e., nonparallel) computations, with moderate data input and output rates.
Those nodes thus map very well to resources that are usually available in
today’s IaaS clouds, such as AWS/EC2 or Eucalyptus. SAGA-based Mont-
age workﬂows can thus seamlessly scale out, and simultaneously span grid,
cloud, and cluster environments. It must be noted that workﬂows with other
358
UNDERSTANDING SCIENTIFIC APPLICATIONS FOR CLOUD ENVIRONMENTS


compute/data characteristics could not be mapped onto cloud resources
prevalent today: The usage modes supported by AWS/EC2 and the like do
not, at the moment, cover massive parallel applications, low-latency pipeline,
and so on.
Table 13.4 gives the results (mean 1 standard deviation) for several SAGA
Montage experiments. The AWS/EC2 times (#9, #10, #11) are cleared of the
EC2 startup times—those are discussed in detail in reference 28. If multiple
resources are speciﬁed, the individual DAG nodes are mapped to the respective
resources in round-robin fashion. Note that the table also gives the times
for the traditional DAGMan execution to a local and a remote Condor pool
(#12, #13).
13.3.3
Ensemble of Biomolecular Simulations
Several classes of applications are well-suited for distributed environments.
Probably the best-known and most powerful examples are those that involve an
ensemble of decoupled tasks, such as simple parameter sweep applications [50].
In the following we investigate an ensemble of (parallel HPC) MD simulations.
Ensemble-based approaches represent an important and promising attempt to
overcome the general limitations of insufﬁcient timescales, as well as speciﬁc
limitations of inadequate conformational sampling arising from kinetic trap-
pings. The fact that one single long-running simulation can be substituted for
an ensemble of simulations makes these ideal candidates for distributed
environments. This provides an important general motivation for researching
TABLE 13.4. Execution Measurements
#
Resources
Middleware
Walltime
(sec)
Standard
Deviation
(sec)
Difference
from
Local (sec)
1
L
F
68.7
9.4
—
2
L
S
131.3
8.7
62.6
3
L
C
155.0
16.6
86.3
4
L
F, S
89.8
5.7
21.1
5
L
F, C
117.7
17.7
49.0
6
L
F, C
133.5
32.5
64.8
7
L
F, S, C
144.8
18.3
76.1
8
Q
S
491.6
50.6
422.9
9
E
A
354.2
23.3
285.5
10
E, Q
S, A
363.6
60.9
294.0
11
L, Q, E
F, S, A
409.6
60.9
340.9
12
L
D
168.8
5.3
100.1
13
P
D
309.7
41.5
241.0
Resources: L, local; P, Purdue; Q, Queen Bee; E, AWS/EC2
Middleware: F, FORK/SAGA; S, SSH/SAGA; A, AWS/SAGA; C, Condor/SAGA; D, Condor/
DAGMan.
13.3
SAGA-BASED SCIENTIFIC APPLICATIONS THAT UTILIZE CLOUDS
359


ways to support scale-out and thus enhance sampling and to thereby increase
“effective” timescales studied.
The physical system we investigate is the HCV internal ribosome entry site
and is recognized speciﬁcally by the small ribosomal subunit and eukaryotic
initiation factor 3 (eIF3) before viral translation initiation. This makes it a good
candidate for new drugs targeting HCV. The initial conformation of the RNA
is taken from the NMR structure (PDB ID: 1PK7). By using multiple replicas,
the aim is to enhance the sampling of the conformational ﬂexibility of the
molecule as well as the equilibrium energetics.
To efﬁciently execute the ensemble of batch jobs without the necessity to queue
each individual job, the application utilizes the SAGA BigJob framework [51].
BigJob is a Pilot Job framework that provides the user a uniform abstraction to
grids and clouds independent of any particular cloud or grid provider that can be
instantiated dynamically. Pilot Jobs are an execution abstraction that have been
used by many communities to increase the predictability and time-to-solution of
such applications. Pilot Jobs have been used to (i) improve the utilization
of resources, (ii) reduce the net wait time of a collection of tasks, (iii) facilitate
bulk or high-throughput simulations where multiple jobs need to be submitted
which would otherwise saturate the queuing system, and (iv) implement applica-
tion-speciﬁc scheduling decisions and policy decisions.
As shown in Figure 13.3, BigJob currently provides an abstraction to
grids, Condor pools, and clouds. Using the same API, applications can
Distributed Application
BigJob Cloud
Application Layer
Physical Resource Layer
Nimbus/Amazon/
Eucalyptus Cloud
TeraGrid (Globus)
Node n
Front Node
GRAM
BJ Agent
TeraGrid (Condor-G)
Node n
Front Node
GRAM
Condor
SSH
VM n
BigJob TG
BigJob Condor
SAGA BigJob API
VM n
VM n
VM n
FIGURE 13.3. An overview of the SAGA-based Pilot Job: The SAGA Pilot-Job API is
currently implemented by three different back-ends: one for grids, one for Condor, and
one for clouds.
360
UNDERSTANDING SCIENTIFIC APPLICATIONS FOR CLOUD ENVIRONMENTS


dynamically allocate resources via the big-job interface and bind sub-jobs to
these resources.
In the following, we use an ensemble of MD simulations to investigate
different BigJob usage modes and analyze the time-to-completion, TC, in
different scenarios.
Scenario A: TC for Workload for Different Resource Conﬁgurations. In
this scenario and as proof of scale-out capabilities, we use SAGA BigJob to run
replicas across different types of infrastructures. At the beginning of the
experiment a particular set of Pilot Jobs is started in each environment. Once
a Pilot Job becomes active, the application assigns replicas to this job.
We
measure TC for different resource conﬁgurations using a workload of eight
replicas each running on eight cores. The following setups have been used:
Scenario A1: Resource I and III—Clouds and GT2-based grids.
Scenario A2: Resource II and III—Clouds and Condor grids.
Scenario A3: Resource I, II, and III—Clouds, GT2, and Condor grids.
For this experiment, the LONI clusters Poseidon and Oliver are used as grid
and Condor resources, and Nimbus is used as a cloud resource.
Figure 13.4 shows the results. For the ﬁrst three bars, only one infrastructure
was used to complete the eight-replica workload. Running the whole scenario
in the Science Cloud resulted in a quite poor but predictable performance; the
standard deviation for this scenario is very low. The LONI resources are about
three times faster than the Science Cloud, which corresponds to our earlier
ﬁndings. The performance of the Condor and grid BigJob is similar, which can
be expected since the underlying physical LONI resources are the same. Solely,
a slightly higher startup overhead can be observed in the Condor runtimes.
In the next set of three experiments, multiple resources were used. For
Scenario A1 (the fourth bar from left), two replicas were executed on the
Science Cloud. The ofﬂoading of two replicas to an additional cloud resource
resulted in a light improvement of TC compared to using just LONI resources.
Thus, the usage of cloud resources must be carefully considered since TC is
determined by the slowest resource, that is, Nimbus. As described earlier, the
startup time for Nimbus images is, particularly for such short runs, signiﬁcant.
Also, NAMD performs signiﬁcantly worse in the Nimbus cloud than on
Poseidon or Oliver. Since the startup time on Nimbus averages to 357 sec
and each eight-core replica runs for about 363 sec, at least 720 sec must be
allowed for running a single replica on Nimbus. Thus, it can be concluded that
if resources in the grids or Condor pool are instantly available, it is not
reasonable to start additional cloud resources. However, it must be noted that
there are virtual machines types with a better performance available—for
example, in the Amazon cloud. These VMs are usually associated with higher
costs (up to $2.40 per CPU hour) than the Science Cloud VMs. For a further
13.3
SAGA-BASED SCIENTIFIC APPLICATIONS THAT UTILIZE CLOUDS
361


discussion of cost trade-offs for scientiﬁc computations in clouds, see Deelman
et al. [52].
Scenario B: TC for Workload for Different Resource Conﬁgurations.
Given that clouds provide the illusion of inﬁnite capacity, or at least queue
wait-times are nonexistent, it is likely that when using multiple resource types
and with loaded grids/clusters (e.g., TeraGrid is currently over-subscribed and
typical queue wait-times often exceed 24 hours), most sub-jobs will end up on
the cloud infrastructure. Thus, in Scenario B, the resource assignment algo-
rithm we use is as follows: We submit tasks to non-cloud resources ﬁrst and
periodically monitor the progress of the tasks. If insufﬁcient jobs have ﬁnished
when time equal to TX has elapsed (determined per criteria outlined below),
then we move the workload to utilize clouds. The underlying basis is that clouds
have an explicit cost associated with them; and if jobs can be completed on the
TeraGrid/Condor-pool while preserving the performance constraints, we opt
for such a solution. However, if queue loads prevent the performance require-
ments from being met, we move the jobs to a cloud resource, which we have
shown has less ﬂuctuation in TC of the workload.
For this experiment we integrated a progress manager that implements the
described algorithm into the replica application. The user has the possibility to
Science Cloud
8cr/8rp
0
500
1.000
1.500
2.000
2.500
3.000
Runtime (in sec)
3.500
LONI 8cr/8rp
Resource #cores/#replicas
LONI 8cr/6rp
Science Cloud
8cr/2rp
LONI 8cr/4rp
Condor P.
8cr/4rp
LONI 8cr/4rp
Condor P. 8cr/3rp
Sci. Cloud 8cr/1rp
Condor Pool
8cr/8rp
FIGURE 13.4. Collective usage of grid, Condor, and cloud resources for workload of
eight replicas. The experiments showed that if the grid and Condor resource Poseidon
has only a light load, no beneﬁts for using additional cloud resources exist. However, the
introduction of an additional Condor or grid resource signiﬁcantly decreases TC.
362
UNDERSTANDING SCIENTIFIC APPLICATIONS FOR CLOUD ENVIRONMENTS


specify a maximum runtime and a check interval. At the beginning of each
check interval, the progress manager compares the number of jobs done with
the total number of jobs and estimates the total number of jobs that can be
completed within the requested timeframe. If the total number of jobs is higher
than this estimate, the progress monitor instantiates another BigJob object
request additional cloud resources for a single replica. In this scenario, each
time an intermediate target is not met, four additional Nimbus VMs sufﬁcient
for running another eight core replica are instantiated. Table 13.5 summarizes
the results.
In the investigated scenario, we conﬁgured a maximum runtime of 45 min
and a progress check interval of 4 min. We repeated the same experiment 10
times at different times of the day. In 6 out of 10 cases the scenario was
completed in about 8 minutes. However, the ﬂuctuation in particular in the
waiting time on typical grid resources can be very high. Thus, in four cases, it
was necessary to start additional VMs to meet the application deadline. In two
cases, three Pilot Jobs each with eight cores had to be started, and in one case a
single Pilot Job was sufﬁcient. In a single case the deadline was missed solely
because not enough cloud resources were available; that is, we were only able to
start two instead of three Pilot Jobs.
13.4
DISCUSSION
It is still unclear what the predominant usage mode of cloud infrastructures will
be. As shown, there are a large number of applications that are able to utilize
clouds, including both data-intensive applications (i.e., those that require data-
compute afﬁnity) and compute-intensive applications. While clouds can sup-
port different compute-intensive usage modes (e.g., distributed, tightly coupled
and loosely coupled applications), tightly coupled applications are less well
suited for clouds because current cloud infrastructures lack high-end, low-
latency interconnects. Another interesting type of application includes pro-
grams that are able to utilize clouds in addition to traditional grids in a hybrid
mode. Using dynamic and adaptive execution modes, the time-to-solution for
many applications can be reduced and exceptional runtime situations (e.g.,
failures or scheduling delays) can be handled.
TABLE 13.5. Usage of Cloud Pilot Jobs to Ensure Deadline
Result
Number of
Occurrences
Average TC
(minutes)
No VM started
6
7.8
1 VM started
1
36.4
2 VMs started
1
47.3
3 VMs started
2
44.2
13.4
DISCUSSION
363


Developing and running applications on dynamic computational infrastruc-
tures such as clouds presents new and signiﬁcant challenges. This includes the
need for programming systems such as SAGA, which is able to express the
different usage modes, associated runtime trade-offs, and adaptations. Other
issues include: decomposing applications, components and workﬂows; deter-
mining and provisioning the appropriate mix of grid/cloud resources, and
dynamically scheduling them across the hybrid execution environment while
satisfying/balancing multiple possibly changing objectives for performance,
resilience, budgets, and so on.
13.4.1
IDEAS Revisited
In computational science applications that utilize distributed infrastructure
(such as computational grids and clouds), dealing with heterogeneity and scale
of the underlying infrastructure remains a challenge. As shown in Table 13.6,
SAGA and SAGA-based abstractions help to advance the IDEAS design
objectives: Interoperability, Distributed scale-out, Extensibilty, Adaptivity and
Simplicity:
 Interoperability. In all three examples, application-level interoperability is
provided by the SAGA programming system. SAGA decouples applica-
tions from the underlying physical resources and provides infrastructure-
independent control over the application deployment, decomposition, and
runtime execution.
 Distributed Scale-Out. SAGA-based applications and frameworks, such
as SAGA BigJob and Digedag, support the distributed scale-out of
applications to multiple and possibly heterogeneous infrastructures—for
example, different types of clouds and grids.
 Extensibility. The example clouds applications are extensible in several
directions; new functionality and usage modes can simply be incorporated
using SAGA. Additional distributed cloud and grid infrastructures can be
included by conﬁguration using a different middleware adaptor.
TABLE 13.6. Design objectives addressed by the different applications: Interoperability,
infrastructure independence; Distributed Scale-Out, ability to use multiple distributed
resources concurrently; Extensibility, extensibility and general purpose uptake; Adaptiv-
ity, ability to respond to changes; and Simplicity, greater simplicity without sacriﬁcing
functionality and performance.
Application
Interoperability
Distr.
Scale-Out Extensibility Adaptivity Simplicity
SAGA MapReduce
Y
Y
Y
Y
SAGA Montage
Y
Y
Y
Y
Biomolecular Ensemble
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
364
UNDERSTANDING SCIENTIFIC APPLICATIONS FOR CLOUD ENVIRONMENTS


 Adaptivity. Distributed applications that utilize SAGA are able to
explicitly beneﬁt from the cloud properties such as elasticity and to pursue
dynamic execution modes. Examples of such usage mode include the
usage of additional resources to meet a deadline or to meet an increased
resource demand due to a certain runtime condition.
 Simplicity. SAGA provides a simple, high-level programming abstraction
to express core distributed functionality. Simplicity arises from the fact
that the API is very focused and reduced to the most essential
functionalities.
13.4.2
Interoperability of Scientiﬁc Applications across
Clouds and HPC/Grids
It is still unclear what kind of programming models and programming systems
will emerge for clouds. It has been shown that traditional distributed applica-
tions can be easily ported to IaaS environments. The nature of applications as
well as the provided system-level interfaces will play an important role for
interoperability. While several technical infrastructure features, as well as
economical policies, inﬂuence the design of programming models for the cloud
era, it is important for effective scientiﬁc application development that any such
system should not be constrained to a speciﬁc infrastructure—that is, it should
support infrastructure interoperability at the application-level.
The SAGA programming system provides a standard interface and can
support powerful programming models. SAGA allows application developers
to implement common and basic distributed functionality, such as application
decomposition, distributed job submission, and distributed ﬁle movement/
management, independently of the underlying infrastructure. The SAGA cloud
adaptors provide the foundation for accessing cloud storage and compute
resource via the SAGA API. The ability to design and develop applications in
an infrastructure-independent way leads to new kinds of application, such as
dynamic applications. Such applications have dynamic runtime requirements
and are able to adapt to changing runtime environments and resource
availabilities. SAGA provides developers with new capability while introducing
a new set of challenges and trade-offs. Application developers are, for
example, able to utilize new execution modes in conjunction with “traditional”
distributed applications but must, however, consider new trade-offs, for
example, when selecting a resource.
The MapReduce programming model has exempliﬁed a novel way to
construct distributed applications for the cloud. It has been perceived as a
programming pattern to lead the implementation of some future scientiﬁc
applications. There has been a lot of testing on simple applications performing
map and reduce computations on VMs as well as on traditional local clusters in
order to ﬁrst verify the scalability of performance that the proposed model
successfully offers and then, most importantly, guarantee interoperability
13.4
DISCUSSION
365


between VMs and local clusters for a given application. As shown, SAGA
MapReduce is able to run across different cloud and cloud-like back-end
infrastructures.
As highlighted earlier, SAGA provides the basis for dynamic applications.
Such applications greatly beneﬁt from the ability of clouds to dynamically
provision resources. The biomolecular ensemble application, for example,
easily scales out to cloud and grid infrastructures and is able to utilize
additional cloud resources to ensure the progress toward a deadline. Further-
more, SAGA enables applications and higher-level frameworks such as BigJob
to deploy dynamic schedulers that determine the appropriate mix of cloud/grid
resources and are able to adaptively respond to special runtime situations, such
as faults.
Similarly, the development of workﬂow applications such as SAGA Mon-
tage can be both simple and efﬁcient using the right tools. While SAGA
Montage can easily be run across grid and clouds, the current version follows a
traditional static execution model. In the future, the decision of where to run
Montage components should be made at runtime, taking into account the
current system and network utilization. Furthermore, capabilities, such as the
ability to dynamically reschedule tasks, should be considered.
13.4.3
Application Performance Considerations
Undoubtedly, the most important characteristic for the establishment of a
scientiﬁc application is its overall performance. There are proposals on
including HPC tools and scientiﬁc libraries in EC2 AMIs and have them ready
to run on request. This might lead to re-implementing some HPC tools and
deploying public images on Amazon or other vendors speciﬁcally for scientiﬁc
purposes (e.g., the SGI Cyclone Cloud [53]). Still, in order to include ready-to-
use MPI clusters on EC2, there are several challenges to be met: The machine
images must be manually prepared, which involves setting up the operating
system, the application’s software environment and the security credentials.
However, this step is only initially required and comparable with moving an
application to a new grid resource. Furthermore, the virtual machines must be
started and managed by the application. As shown, several middleware
frameworks, such as BigJob, are already able to utilize and manage cloud
resources taking the burden off the application. Depending on the cloud
infrastructure used, the spawning of VMs usually involves some overhead for
resource allocation and for staging the VM to the target machine. At the end of
the run, the results must be obtained and stored persistently, and the cluster
must be terminated.
Another concern that scientists have to deal with in a cloud environment are
different computational overheads as well as high and sometimes unpredictable
communication latencies and limited bandwidths. For applications that are
HPC applications, where the coupling of communication and computation is
366
UNDERSTANDING SCIENTIFIC APPLICATIONS FOR CLOUD ENVIRONMENTS


relatively tight and where there is relatively frequent communication including
global communication, clouds can be used, but with added performance
overhead, at least on today’s clouds. These overheads have various sources,
some of which can be reduced. How much of this overhead must exist and will
exist in the future is unclear.
There are two types of overhead: (i) added computational overhead of a VM
and (ii) communication overhead when communicating between VMs. The ﬁrst
type of overhead results from the use of VMs and the fact that the underlying
hardware is shared. While clouds nowadays deploy highly efﬁcient virtualiza-
tion solutions that impose very low overheads on applications (see reference
51), unanticipated load increases on the cloud providers infrastructure can
affect the runtime of scientiﬁc applications. The communication overhead
mainly results from the fact that most clouds do not use networking hardware
that is as low-overhead as that of dedicated HPC systems. There are at least two
routes to parallelism in VMs. The ﬁrst is a single VM across multiple cores; the
second is parallelism across VMs. The latter type is especially affected from
these communication overheads; that is, tightly coupled workloads (e.g., MPI
jobs) are likely to see a degraded performance if they run across multiple VMs.
Also, the common perception of clouds does not include the ability to
co-locate different parts of a single application on a single physical cluster.
Again, some of this network-related overhead can be reduced. At the time of
writing this chapter, it is unclear to the authors if there is community consensus
on what the performance of HPC applications on clouds is expected to be
compared to bare-metal, whether the future model is that of a single VM over
multiple-cores, or if there will be an aggregation of multiple VMs to form a
single application, and thus importantly it is unclear what the current limita-
tions on performance are. Additionally, there is also work in progress to
develop pass-through communication and I/O, where the VM would not add
overhead, though this is not yet mature.
13.5
CONCLUSIONS
As established earlier, both cloud and grid applications are incarnations of
distributed applications. Applications require only small modiﬁcations to run
on clouds, even if most of them only utilize “legacy” modes; that is, they usually
run on a set of static resources [54]. Additionally, cloud applications are
generally able to take advantage of existing abstractions and interfaces.
With the emergence of clouds and a general increase in the importance of
data-intensive applications, programming models for data-intensive applica-
tions have gained signiﬁcant attention; a prominent example is MapReduce. It
is important to remember that these are not grid- or cloud-speciﬁc program-
ming models; they can be used in either or both contexts. Most applications can
in principle use either a grid or a cloud; whether they use a grid or a cloud is
13.5
CONCLUSIONS
367


dependent upon the level of control and decomposition that needs to be
asserted and/or retained. Additional factors that determine this decision
include the offering of the programming model, as well as a mapping to the
capabilities of infrastructure that addresses the desired afﬁnities, such as
computecommunication and computedata afﬁnities [54].
The usability and effectiveness of a programming model is dependent upon
the desired degree of control in the application development, deployment, and
execution. To efﬁciently support coordinated execution across heterogeneous
grid and cloud infrastructures, programming tools and systems are required.
It is important to ensure that such programming systems and tools provide
open interfaces and support the IDEAS design objectives. Furthermore,
these tools must address the cloud’s inherent elasticity and support applica-
tions with dynamic resource requirements and execution modes. Programming
systems such as SAGA provide developers with ability to express application
decompositions and coordinations via a simple, high-level API. Having
established that cloud applications are conceptually akin to grid applications,
we have shown, via several scientiﬁc applications, how SAGA has proven to be
a programming system to develop applications that can utilize grids and clouds
effectively.
REFERENCES
1.
P. Mell and T. Grance, The NIST deﬁnition of cloud computing.
2.
S. Jha et al., Programming Abstractions for Large-scale Distributed Applications,
submitted to ACM Computing Surveys; draft at http://www.cct.lsu.edu/Bsjha/
publications/dpa_surveypaper.pdf.
3.
L. Youseff, M. Butrico, and D. Da Silva, Toward a uniﬁed ontology of cloud
computing, in Proceedings of the Grid Computing Environments Workshop, GCE
’08, November 2008, 110.
4.
M. Armbrust et al., Above the clouds: A Berkeley View of Cloud Computing,
Technical Report UCB/EECS-200928, EECS Department, University of Califor-
nia, Berkeley, February 2009.
5.
N. Wilkins-Diehr, D. Gannon, G. Klimeck, S. Oster, and S. Pamidighantam,
TeraGridsciencegatewaysandtheirimpactonscience.Computer,41(11):3241,2008.
6.
Google App Engine, http://code.google.com/appengine/.
7.
Windows Azure, http://www.microsoft.com/windowsazure/.
8.
P. Watson, D. Leahy, H. Hiden, S. Woodman, and J. Berry, An Azure Science
Cloud for Drug Discovery, Microsoft External Research Symposium, 2009.
9.
J. Dean and S. Ghemawat, MapReduce: Simpliﬁed data processing on large
clusters, in Proceedings of the 6th Conference on Symposium on Operating Systems
Design & Implementation, Berkeley, CA, USENIX Association, 2004, pp. 137150.
10.
Hadoop: Open Source Implementation of MapReduce, http://hadoop.apache.org/.
11.
Amazon Elastic MapReduce, http://aws.amazon.com/elasticmapreduce/.
368
UNDERSTANDING SCIENTIFIC APPLICATIONS FOR CLOUD ENVIRONMENTS


12.
M. Isard, M. Budiu, Y. Yu, A. Birrell, and D. Fetterly, Dryad: Distributed data-
parallel programs from sequential building blocks, SIGOPS Operating System
Review, 41(3):5972, 2007.
13.
F. Chang et al., Bigtable: A distributed storage system for structured data, in
Proceedings of the 7th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and
Implementation, pages 1515, Berkeley, CA, USA, 2006. USENIX Association,
14.
Amazon EC2 Web Service, http://ec2.amazonaws.com.
15.
Rackspace Cloud, http://www.rackspacecloud.com/.
16.
GoGrid Cloud Hosting, http://www.gogrid.com/.
17.
Eucalyptus, http://open.eucalyptus.com/.
18.
K. Keahey, I. Foster, T. Freeman, and X. Zhang, Virtual workspaces: Achieving
quality of service and quality of life in the grid, Scientiﬁc Programming, 13
(4):265275, 2005.
19.
Science Cloud. http://scienceclouds.org/.
20.
Future Grid. http://www.futuregrid.org/.
21.
Amazon S3 Web Service. http://s3.amazonaws.com.
22.
Rackspace Cloud Files. http://www.rackspacecloud.com/cloud_hosting_ pro-
ducts/ﬁles/.
23.
Eucalyptus Walrus. http://open.eucalyptus.com/wiki/EucalyptusStorage_ v1.4.
24.
S. Ghemawat, H. Gobioff, and S. Leung, The Google File System, SIGOPS
Operating System Reviews, 37(5):2943, 2003.
25.
HDFS. http://hadoop.apache.org/common/docs/current/hdfs_design. html.
26.
C. Evangelinos and C. Hill, Cloud computing for parallel scientiﬁc HPC applica-
tions: Feasibility of running coupled atmosphere-ocean climate models on Ama-
zon’s EC2, Cloud Computing and Its Applications (CCA-08), 2008.
27.
M.-E. B´egin, Grids and Clouds—Evolution or Revolution, https://edms.cern. ch/
ﬁle/925013/3/EGEE-Grid-Cloud.pdf, 2008.
28.
A. Merzky, K. Stamou, and S. Jha, Application level interoperability between
clouds and grids, in Proceedings of the Grid and Pervasive Computing Conference,
May 2009, pp. 143150.
29.
T. Goodale et al., SAGA: A simple API for grid applications, high-level applica-
tion programming on the grid, Computational Methods in Science and Technology,
12(1):720, 2006.
30.
T. Goodale, S. Jha, H. Kaiser, T. Kielmann, P. Kleijer, A. Merzky, J. Shalf, and C.
Smith, A Simple API for Grid Applications (SAGA), OGF Document Series 90,
http://www.ogf.org/documents/GFD.90.pdf.
31.
H. Kaiser, A. Merzky, S. Hirmer, and G. Allen, The SAGA C11 Reference
Implementation, in Object-Oriented Programming, Systems, Languages and Appli-
cations (OOPSLA’06)—Library-Centric Software Design (LCSD’06), Portland,
OR, USA, October 2226 2006.
32.
JSaga. http://grid.in2p3.fr/jsaga/index.html.
33.
C. Miceli, M. Miceli, S. Jha, H. Kaiser, and A. Merzky, Programming abstractions
for data intensive computing on clouds and grids, in Proceedings of the 9th IEEE/
ACM International Symposium on Cluster Computing and the Grid, May 2009, pp.
478483.
REFERENCES
369


34.
CloudStore, http://kosmosfs.sourceforge.net.
35.
HBase, http://hadoop.apache.org/hbase/.
36.
The Montage project, http://montage.ipac.caltech.edu/.
37.
G. B. Berriman, J. C. Good, D. Curkendall, J. Jacob, D. S. Katz, T. A. Prince, and
R. Williams. Montage: An on-demand image mosaic service for the NVO,
Astronomical Data Analysis Software and Systems (ADASS) XII, 2002.
38.
A Merzky, K Stamou, S Jha, and D Katz, A fresh perspective on developing and
executing DAG-based distributed applications: A case-study of SAGA-based
Montage, in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on eScience 2009, Oxford.
39.
G. B. Berriman, J. C. Good, A. C. Laity, J. C. Jacob, D. S. Katz, E. Deelman, G.
Singh, M.-H. Su, R. Williams, and T. Prince, Science applications of Montage: An
astronomical image mosaic engine, presented at IAU XXXVI General Assembly,
2006.
40.
E. Deelman et al., The cost of doing science on the cloud: The Montage example,
Proceedings of SC08, Austin, Texas, 2008.
41.
E. Deelman, J. Blythe, Y. Gil, C. Kesselman, G. Mehta, and K. Vahi, Mapping
abstract complex workﬂows onto grid environments, Journal of Grid Computing,
1(1):2539, 2003.
42.
E. Deelman, J. Blythe, Y. Gil, C. Kesselman, G. Mehta, S. Patil, M.-H. Su, K.
Vahi, and M. Livny, Pegasus: Mapping scientiﬁc workﬂows onto the grid, in
Proceedings of the Across Grids Conference, 2004.
43.
Condor DAGMAn, http://www.cs.wisc.edu/condor/dagman/.
44.
M. Wieczorek, R. Prodan, and T. Fahringer, Scheduling of scientiﬁc workﬂows in
the askalon grid environment, ACM SIGMOD Record, 34(3):5262, 2005.
45.
M. Humphrey and S. Park, Data throttling for data-intensive workﬂows, in
Proceedings of the IEEE International Parallel and Distributed Processing Sympo-
sium, 111, 2008.
46.
Y. Zhao et al., Swift: Fast, reliable, loosely coupled parallel computation, IEEE
Congress on Services, pages 199206, 2007.
47.
H. Truong, T. Fahringer, and S. Dustda, Dynamic instrumentation, performance
monitoring and analysis of grid scientiﬁc workﬂows, Journal of Grid Computing,
2005(3):118, 2005.
48.
VGRaDS: Montage, a project providing a portable, compute-intensive service
delivering custom mosaics on demand.
49.
G. Juve, E. Deelman, K. Vahi, G. Mehta, B. Berriman, B. Berman, and P.
Maechling, Scientiﬁc workﬂow applications on Amazon EC2, in Proceedings of the
Workshop on Cloud-based Services and Applications in conjunction with 5th IEEE
International Conference on e-Science (e-Science 2009), 2009.
50.
H. Casanova, G. Obertelli, F. Berman, and R. Wolski, The apples parameter sweep
template:
User-level
middleware
for
the
grid,
Scientiﬁc
Programming,
8
(3):111126, 2000.
51.
A. Luckow, L. Lacinski, and S. Jha. Saga bigjob: An extensible and interoperable
pilot-job abstraction for distributed applications and systems, in Proceedings of the
10th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster, Cloud and Grid Computing,
2010.
370
UNDERSTANDING SCIENTIFIC APPLICATIONS FOR CLOUD ENVIRONMENTS


52.
E. Deelman, G. Singh, M. Livny, B. Berriman, and J. Good, The cost of doing
science on the cloud: the montage example, in Proceedings of the 2008 ACM/IEEE
Conference on Supercomputing, IEEE Press, New York, 2008, pp. 112.
53.
SGI CycloneHPC Cloud, http://www.sgi.com/products/hpc_cloud/cyclone/
index.html.
54.
S. Jha, A. Merzky, and G. Fox, Using clouds to provide grids with higher levels of
abstraction and explicit support for usage modes, Concurrency and Computation:
Practice & Experience, 21(8):10871108, 2009.
REFERENCES
371


CHAPTER 14
THE MAPREDUCE PROGRAMMING
MODEL AND IMPLEMENTATIONS
HAI JIN, SHADI IBRAHIM, LI QI, HAIJUN CAO, SONG WU
and XUANHUA SHI
14.1
INTRODUCTION
Recently the computing world has been undergoing a signiﬁcant transforma-
tion from the traditional noncentralized distributed system architecture,
typiﬁed by distributed data and computation on different geographic areas,
to a centralized cloud computing architecture, where the computations and
data are operated somewhere in the “cloud”—that is, data centers owned and
maintained by third party.
Theinterestin cloudcomputinghas beenmotivatedbymany factors[1]such as
the low cost of system hardware, the increase in computing power and storage
capacity(e.g.,themoderndatacenterconsistsofhundredofthousandofcoresand
petascale storage), and the massive growth in data size generated by digital media
(images/audio/video), Web authoring, scientiﬁc instruments, physical simula-
tions,andsoon.Tothisend,stillthemainchallengeinthecloudishowtoeffectively
store, query, analyze, and utilize these immense datasets. The traditional data-
intensivesystem(datatocomputingparadigm)isnotefﬁcientforcloudcomputing
due to the bottleneck of the Internet when transferring large amounts of data to a
distant CPU [2]. New paradigms should be adopted, where computing and data
resources are co-located, thus minimizing the communication cost and beneﬁting
from the large improvements in IO speeds using local disks, as shown in Figure 14.1.
Alex Szalay and Jim Gray stated in a commentary on 2020 computing [3]:
In the future, working with large data sets will typically mean sending computa-
tions to data rather than copying the data to your work station.
Cloud Computing: Principles and Paradigms,
Edited by Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg and
Andrzej Goscinski
Copyright r 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
373


Google has successfully implemented and practiced the new data-intensive
paradigm in their Google MapReduce System (e.g., Google uses its MapRe-
duce framework to process 20 petabytes of data per day [4]). The MapReduce
system runs on top of the Google File System (GFS) [5], within which data are
loaded, partitioned into chunks, and each chunk is replicated. Data processing
is co-located with data storage: When a ﬁle needs to be processed, the job
scheduler consults a storage metadata service to get the host node for each
chunk and then schedules a “map” process on that node, so that data locality is
exploited efﬁciently.
At the time of writing, due to its remarkable features including simplicity,
fault tolerance, and scalability, MapReduce is by far the most powerful re-
alization of data-intensive cloud computing programming. It is often advocated
as an easier-to-use, efﬁcient and reliable replacement for the traditional data-
intensive programming model for cloud computing. More signiﬁcantly, Ma-
pReduce has been proposed to form the basis of the data-center software
stack [6].
Computing To Data
Conventional Supercomputing
(Data To Computing)
Infrastructure
Programming Model
System
System
Skinny Pipe
Computing
Computing
System collects and maintains data (Shared, active data set) Data stored in separate repository (no support for collection or
management)
Data Brought into system for computation (Time consuming and limits
interactivity)
Computation colocated with storage (Faster access)
Application programs written in terms of high-level
operations on data
Programs described at very low level specify detailed control of
processing and communications
Runtime system controls scheduling, load balancing, . . .
Rely on small number of software packages (Written by specialists,
limits classes of problems and solution methods)
Data
Application
Programs
Application
Programs
Runtime
System
Software
Packages
Hardware
Hardware
Machine-Dependent
Programming Models
Machine-Dependent
Programming Models
Data
FIGURE 14.1. Traditional Data-to-Computing Paradigm versus Computing-to-Data
Paradigm [10].
374
THE MAPREDUCE PROGRAMMING MODEL AND IMPLEMENTATIONS


MapReduce has been widely applied in various ﬁelds including data-
and compute-intensive applications, machine learning, graphic programming,
multi-core programming, and so on. Moreover, many implementations have
been developed in different languages for different purposes.
Its popular open-source implementation, Hadoop [7], was developed pri-
marily by Yahoo!, where it processes hundreds of terabytes of data on at least
10,000 cores [8], and is now used by other companies, including Facebook,
Amazon, Last.fm, and the New York Times [9]. Research groups from the
enterprise and academia are starting to study the MapReduce model for better
ﬁt for the cloud, and they explore the possibilities of adapting it for more
applications.
14.2
MAPREDUCE PROGRAMMING MODEL
MapReduce is a software framework for solving many large-scale computing
problems. The MapReduce abstraction is inspired by the Map and Reduce
functions, which are commonly used in functional languages such as Lisp [4].
The MapReduce system allows users to easily express their computation as map
and reduce functions (more details can be found in Dean and Ghemawat [4]):
 The map function, written by the user, processes a key/value pair to
generate a set of intermediate key/value pairs:
map (key1, value1) - list (key2, value2)
 The reduce function, also written by the user, merges all intermediate
values associated with the same intermediate key:
reduce (key2, list (value2)) - list (value2)
14.2.1
The Wordcount Example
As a simple illustration of the Map and Reduce functions, Figure 14.2 shows
the pseudo-code and the algorithm and illustrates the process steps using the
widely used “Wordcount” example. The Wordcount application counts
the number of occurrences of each word in a large collection of documents.
The steps of the process are brieﬂy described as follows: The input is read
(typically from a distributed ﬁle system) and broken up into key/value pairs
(e.g., the Map function emits a word and its associated count of occurrence,
which is just “1”). The pairs are partitioned into groups for processing, and
they are sorted according to their key as they arrive for reduction. Finally, the
key/value pairs are reduced, once for each unique key in the sorted list, to
14.2
MAPREDUCE PROGRAMMING MODEL
375


produce a combined result (e.g., the Reduce function sums all the counts
emitted for a particular word).
14.2.2
Main Features
In this section we list the main features of MapReduce for data-intensive
application:
 Data-Aware. When the MapReduce-Master node is scheduling the Map
tasks for a newly submitted job, it takes in consideration the data location
information retrieved from the GFS-Master node.
 Simplicity. As the MapReduce runtime is responsible for parallelization
and concurrency control, this allows programmers to easily design parallel
and distributed applications.
 Manageability. In traditional data-intensive applications, where data are
stored separately from the computation unit, we need two levels of
management: (i) to manage the input data and then move these data
and prepare them to be executed; (ii) to manage the output data.
In contrast, in the Google MapReduce model, data and computation
are allocated, taking advantage of the GFS, and thus it is easier to manage
the input and output data.
map(String key, String value):
// key: document name
// value: document contents
for each word w in value:
EmitIntermediate(w, “1”):
Map (Document Name, Content)
Algorithm
Pseudo-Code
Example
→
For each (Word)
n  (Word, 1)
(A.txt  to be or) (B.txt  not to be) (C.txt  to be)
A
Map
(be,1)
(be,1)
Reduce
Reduce
Reduce
Reduce
(be,3)
(not,1)
(or,1)
(to,3)
(be,1)
(be,1)
(or,1)
(to,1)
(to,1)
(to,1)
(not,1)
(to,1)
(or,1)
B
Map
(to,1)
(not,1)
Partation
(be,1)
C
Map
(to,1)
(be,1)
For each (Word)
Reduce (Word, Listn(1)) → (Word, Sum (n))
reduce(String key, Iterator values):
// key: a word
// values: a list of counts
int result  0;
for each v in values:
result  ParseInt(v);
Emit(AsString(result));
FIGURE 14.2. The Wordcount example.
376
THE MAPREDUCE PROGRAMMING MODEL AND IMPLEMENTATIONS


 Scalability. Increasing the number of nodes (data nodes) in the system
will increase the performance of the jobs with potentially only minor
losses.
 fault Tolerance and Reliability. The data in the GFS are distributed on
clusters with thousands of nodes. Thus any nodes with hardware
failures can be handled by simply removing them and installing a new
node in their place. Moreover, MapReduce, taking advantage of the
replication in GFS, can achieve high reliability by (1) rerunning all
the tasks (completed or in progress) when a host node is going off-line,
(2) rerunning failed tasks on another node, and (3) launching backup
tasks when these tasks are slowing down and causing a bottleneck to the
entire job.
14.2.3
Execution Overview
As shown in Figure 14.3, when the user program calls the MapReduce
function, the following sequence of actions occurs. More details can be found
in Dean and Ghemawat [4]:
The MapReduce library in the user program ﬁrst splits the input ﬁles into M
pieces of typically 16 to 64 megabytes (MB) per piece. It then starts many copies
User
Program
Master
Intermediate files
(on local disks)
Reduce
phase
Worker
Worker
(6) write
(1) fork
(1) fork
(1) fork
Output
file 1
Output
files
Output
file 0
Worker
Split 0
Split 1
Split 2
Split 3
Split 4
Input
files
(3) read
(4) local write
Worker
Worker
Map
phase
(2)
assign
map
(2)
assign
reduce
(5) remote
read
FIGURE 14.3. MapReduce execution overview [4].
14.2
MAPREDUCE PROGRAMMING MODEL
377


of the program on a cluster. One is the “master” and the rest are “workers.”
The master is responsible for scheduling (assigns the map and reduce tasks to
the worker) and monitoring (monitors the task progress and the worker
health).
When map tasks arise, the master assigns the task to an idle worker, taking
into account the data locality. A worker reads the content of the corresponding
input split and emits a key/value pairs to the user-deﬁned Map function. The
intermediate key/value pairs produced by the Map function are ﬁrst buffered in
memory and then periodically written to a local disk, partitioned into R sets by
the partitioning function.
The master passes the location of these stored pairs to the reduce worker,
which reads the buffered data from the map worker using remote procedure
calls (RPC). It then sorts the intermediate keys so that all occurrences of the
same key are grouped together. For each key, the worker passes the corre-
sponding intermediate value for its entire occurrence to the Reduce function.
Finally, the output is available in R output ﬁles (one per reduce task).
14.2.4
Spotlight on Google MapReduce Implementation
Google’s MapReduce implementation targets large clusters of Linux PCs
connected through Ethernet switches [11]. Tasks are forked using remote
procedure calls. Buffering and communication occurs by reading and writing
ﬁles on the GFS. The runtime library is written in C11 with interfaces in
Python and Java [12]. MapReduce jobs are spread across its massive computing
clusters. For example, the average MapReduce job in September 2007 ran
across approximately 400 machines, and the system delivered approximately
11,000 machine years in a single month as shown in Table 14.1 [4].
TABLE 14.1. MapReduce Statistics for Different Months [4]
Aug. ’04
Mar. ’06
Sep. ’07
Number of jobs (1000s)
29
171
2,217
Avg. completion time (sec)
634
874
395
Machine years used
217
2,002
11,081
Map input data (TB)
3,288
52,254
403,152
Map output data (TB)
758
6,743
34,774
Reduce output data (TB)
193
2,970
14,018
Avg. machines per job
157
268
394
Unique implementations
Map
395
1,958
4,083
Reduce
269
1,208
2,418
378
THE MAPREDUCE PROGRAMMING MODEL AND IMPLEMENTATIONS


14.3
MAJOR MAPREDUCE IMPLEMENTATIONS FOR THE CLOUD
In the following sections, we will introduce some of the major MapReduce
implementations around the world as shown in Table 14.2, and we will provide
a comparison of these different implementations, considering their function-
ality, platform, the associated storage system, programming environment, and
so on, as shown in Table 14.3.
14.3.1
Hadoop
Hadoop [7] is a top-level Apache project, being built and used by a community
of contributors from all over the world [13]. It was advocated by industry’s
premier Web players—Google, Yahoo!, Microsoft, and Facebook—as the
engine to power the cloud [14]. The Hadoop project is stated as a collection
of various subprojects for reliable, scalable distributed computing [7]. It is
deﬁned as follows [7]:
TABLE 14.2. MapReduce Cloud Implementations
Owner
Imp Name
and Website
Start
Time
Last
Release
Distribution
Model
Google
Google
MapReduce
2004
—
Internal use by
Google
http://labs.google
.com/papers/
mapreduce.html
Apache
Hadoop
2004
Hadoop0.20.0
Open source
http://hadoop
.apache.org/
April 22, 2009
GridGain
GridGain
2005
GridGain 2.1.1
Open source
http://www
.gridgain.com/
February 26,
2009
Nokia
Disco
2008
Disco 0.2.3
Open source
http://discoproject
.org/
September 9,
2009
Geni.com
SkyNet
2007
Skynet0.9.3
Open source
http://skynet
.rubyforge.org
May 31, 2008
Manjrasoft
MapReduce.net
(Optional service
of Aneka)
2008
Aneka 1.0
March 27, 2009
Commercial
http://www
.manjrasoft.com/
products.html
14.3
MAJOR MAPREDUCE IMPLEMENTATIONS FOR THE CLOUD
379


TABLE 14.3. Comparison of MapReduce Implementations
Google
MapReduce
Hadoop
Disco
MapReduce.NET
Skynet
GridGain
Focus
Data-intensive
Data-intensive
Data-intensive
Data- and compute-
intensive
Data-intensive
Compute-
intensive
and data-intensive
Architecture
MasterSlave
MasterSlave
Masterslave
MasterSlave
P2P
Masterslave
Platform
Linux
Cross-platform
Linux, Mac
OS X
.Net Windows
OS-independent
Windows, Linux,
Mac OS X
Storage System
GFS
HDFS,
CloudStore, S3
GlusterFS
WinDFS, CIFS,
and NTFS
Message
queuing:
Tuplespace and
MySQL
Data grid
Implementation
Technology
C11
JAVA
Erlang
C#
Ruby
Java
Programming
Environment
Java and
Python
JAVA, shell
utilities
using Hadoop
streaming,
C11 Using
Hadoop
pipes
Python
C#
Ruby
Java
Deployment
Deployed
on Google
clusters
Private and
public
cloud (EC2)
Private and
public cloud
(EC2)
Using Aneka, can be
deployed on private and
public Cloud
Web application
(Rails)
Private and public
cloud
Some Users and
Applications
Google
Baidu [46],
NetSeer [47],
A9.com [48],
Facebook [49] . . .
Nokia Research
center [21]
Vel Tech University [50]
Geni.com [17]
MedVoxel [51],
Pointloyalty [52],
Traﬁcon [53], . . .
380
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>


The Apache Hadoop project develops open-source software for reliable, scalable,
distributed computing. Hadoop includes these subprojects:
 Hadoop Common: The common utilities that support the other Hadoop
subprojects.
 Avro: A data serialization system that provides dynamic integration with scripting
languages.
 Chukwa: A data collection system for managing large distributed systems.
 HBase: A scalable, distributed database that supports structured data storage for
large tables.
 HDFS: A distributed ﬁle system that provides high throughput access to applica-
tion data.
 Hive: A data warehouse infrastructure that provides data summarization and ad
hoc querying.
 MapReduce: A software framework for distributed processing of large data sets on
compute clusters.
 Pig: A high-level data-ﬂow language and execution framework for parallel
computation.
 ZooKeeper: A high-performance coordination service for distributed applications.
HadoopMapReduce Overview. The Hadoop common [7], formerly Hadoop
core, includes ﬁle System, RPC, and serialization libraries and provides the
basic services for building a cloud computing environment with commodity
hardware. The two fundamental subprojects are the MapReduce framework
and the Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS).
The Hadoop Distributed File System is a distributed ﬁle system designed to
run on clusters of commodity machines. It is highly fault-tolerant and is
appropriate for data-intensive applications as it provides high speed access the
application data.
The Hadoop MapReduce framework is highly reliant on its shared ﬁle
system (i.e., it comes with plug-ins for HDFS, CloudStore [15], and Amazon
Simple Storage Service S3 [16]).
The Map/Reduce framework has master/slave architecture. The master,
called JobTracker, is responsible for (a) querying the NameNode for the block
locations, (b) scheduling the tasks on the slave which is hosting the task’s
blocks, and (c) monitoring the successes and failures of the tasks. The slaves,
called TaskTracker, execute the tasks as directed by the master.
Hadoop Communities. Yahoo! has been the largest contributor to the
Hadoop project [13]. Yahoo! uses Hadoop extensively in its Web search
and advertising businesses [13]. For example, in 2009, Yahoo! launched,
according to them, the world’s largest Hadoop production application, called
14.3
MAJOR MAPREDUCE IMPLEMENTATIONS FOR THE CLOUD
381


Yahoo! Search Webmap. The Yahoo! Search Webmap runs on a more than
10,000 core Linux cluster and produces data that are now used in every
Yahoo! Web search query [8].
Besides Yahoo!, many other vendors have introduced and developed their
own solutions for the enterprise cloud; these include IBM Blue Cloud [17],
Cloudera [18], Opensolaris Hadoop Live CD [19] by Sun Microsystems, and
Amazon Elastic MapReduce [20], as shown in Table 14.4. Besides the
TABLE 14.4. Some Major Enterprise Solutions Based on Hadoop
Or Name
Solution and Website
Brief Description
Yahoo!
Yahoo!
Distribution of
Hadoop, http://
developer.yahoo
.com/hadoop/
distribution/
The Yahoo! distribution is based entirely on
code found in the Apache Hadoop project. It
includes code patches that Yahoo! has added to
improve the stability and performance of their
clusters. In all cases, these patches have already
been contributed back to Apache.
Cloudera
Cloudera Hadoop
Distribution, http://
www.cloudera
.com/
Cloudera provides enterprise-level support to
users of Apache Hadoop. The Cloudera
Hadoop Distribution is an easy-to-install
package of Hadoop software. It includes
everything you need to conﬁgure and deploy
Hadoop using standard Linux system
administration tools. In addition, Cloudera
provides a training program aimed at producers
and users of large volumes of data.
Amazon
Amazon Elastic
MapReduce,
http://aws.amazon
.com/
elasticmapreduce/
“Web service that enables businesses, research-
ers, data analysts, and developers to easily and
cost-effectively process vast amounts of data. It
utilizes a hosted Hadoop framework running on
the web-scale infrastructure of Amazon Elastic
Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2)[17] and Ama-
zon Simple Storage Service (Amazon S3).”
Sun
Microsy
stems
Hadoop Live CD,
http://opensolaris.
org/os/project/
livehadoop/
This project’s initial CD development tool aims
to provide users who are new to Hadoop with a
fully functional Hadoop cluster that is easy to
start up and use.
IBM
Blue Cloud, http://
www-03.ibm.com/
press/us/en/
pressrelease/22613
.wss
Targets clients who want to explore the extreme
scale of cloud computing infrastructures quickly
and easily. “Blue Cloud will include Xen and
PowerVM virtualized Linux operating system
images and Hadoop parallel workload schedul-
ing. It is supported by IBM Tivoli software that
manages servers to ensure optimal performance
based on demand.”
382
THE MAPREDUCE PROGRAMMING MODEL AND IMPLEMENTATIONS


aforementioned vendors, many other organizations are using Hadoop solutions
to run large distributed computations as shown in Figure 14.4 [9].
14.3.2
Disco
Disco is an open-source MapReduce implementation developed by Nokia [21].
The Disco core is written in Erlang, while users of Disco typically write jobs in
Python. Disco was started at Nokia Research Center as a lightweight frame-
work for rapid scripting of distributed data processing tasks. Furthermore,
Disco has been successfully used, for instance, in parsing and reformatting
data, data clustering, probabilistic modeling, data mining, full-text indexing,
and log analysis with hundreds of gigabytes of real-world data.
Disco is based on the master-slave architecture as shown is Figure 14.5.
When the Disco master receives jobs from clients, it adds them to the job queue,
and runs them in the cluster when CPUs become available. On each node there
is a Worker supervisor that is responsible for spawning and monitoring all the
running Python worker processes within that node. The Python worker runs
the assigned tasks and then sends the addresses of the resulting ﬁles to the
master through their supervisor.
Public Data Center (Mostly Amazon)
Powerset/Microsoft
NetSeer
A9.com
Adknowledge
Cornell University Web Lab
Baidu
FOX Audience Network
IBM & Google Uni
Facebook
Yahoo!
The Lydia News
Analysis Project
Neptune
Quantcast
Search Wikia
Rackspace
Information Sciences Institute (ISI)
WorldLingo
IIIT, Hyderabad
Hadoop Korean User
Group
Cooliris
Lasr. fm
Gruter. Corp.
ETH Zurich Systems Group
Redpoll
Rapleaf
AOL
Contextweb
Deepdyve
Adobe
Alibaba
Private Data Center
University of Glasgow-
Terrier Team
100-1000
Less than 100 Node
More than 1000
FIGURE 14.4. Organizations using Hadoop to run distributed applications, along with
their cluster scale.
14.3
MAJOR MAPREDUCE IMPLEMENTATIONS FOR THE CLOUD
383


An “httpd” daemon (Web server) runs on each node which enables a remote
Python worker to access ﬁles from the local disk of that particular node.
14.3.3
Mapreduce.NET
Mapreduce.NET [22] is a realization of MapReduce for the.NET platform. It
aims to provide support for a wider variety of data-intensive and compute-
intensive applications (e.g., MRPGA is an extension of MapReduce for GA
applications based on MapReduce.NET [23]).
MapReduce.NET is designed for the Windows platform, with emphasis
on reusing as many existing Windows components as possible. As shown in
Figure 14.6, the MapReduce.Net runtime library is assisted by several compo-
nents services from Aneka [24, 25] and runs on WinDFS.
Aneka is a.NET-based platform for enterprise and public cloud computing.
It supports the development and deployment of.NET-based cloud applications
in public cloud environments, such as Amazon EC2.
Besides Aneka, MapReduce.NET is using WinDFS, a distributed storage
service over the.NET platform. WinDFS manages the stored data by providing
an object-based interface with a ﬂat name space. Moreover, MapReduce.NET
can also work with the Common Internet File System (CIFS) or NTFS.
14.3.4
Skynet
Skynet [17, 26] is a Ruby implementation of MapReduce, created by Geni.
Skynetis“anadaptive,self-upgrading,fault-tolerant,andfullydistributedsystem
with no single point of failure” [17]. At the heart of Skynet is plug-in based
message queue architecture, with the message queuing allowing workers to
Client Process 0
Server 0
Server ...
Worker Supervisor
CPU 0
Python
Worker
CPU ...
Local Disk
httpd
Local Disk
httpd
Local Disk
httpd
Python
Worker
CPU X
Python
Worker
CPU 0
Python
Worker
CPU ...
Python
Worker
CPU X
Python
Worker
CPU 0
Python
Worker
CPU ...
Python
Worker
CPU X
Worker Supervisor
Worker Supervisor
Server N
Client Process ...
Disco Master
Client Process Q
FIGURE 14.5. Architecture of Disco [21].
384
THE MAPREDUCE PROGRAMMING MODEL AND IMPLEMENTATIONS


watch out for each other. If a worker fails, another worker will notice and pick
up that task. Currently, there are two message queue implementations available:
one built on Rinda [27] that uses Tuplespace [28] and one built on MySQL.
Skynet works by putting “tasks” on a message queue that are picked up by
skynet workers. Skynet workers execute the tasks after loading the code at
startup; Skynet tells the worker where all the needed code is. The workers put
their results back on the message queue.
14.3.5
GridGain
GridGain [29] is an open cloud platform, developed in Java, for Java. GridGain
enables users to develop and run applications on private or public clouds. The
MapReduce paradigm is at core of what GridGain does. It deﬁnes the process
of splitting an initial task into multiple subtasks, executing these subtasks in
parallel and aggregating (reducing) results back to one ﬁnal result. New
features have been added in the GridGain MapReduce implementation such
as: distributed task session, checkpoints for long running tasks, early and late
load balancing, and afﬁnity co-location with data grids.
14.4
MAPREDUCE IMPACTS AND RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
Since J. Dean and S. Ghemawat proposed the MapReduce model [4], it has
received much attention from both industry and academia. Many projects are
exploring ways to support MapReduce on various types of distributed
architecture and for a wider range of applications as shown in Figure 14.7.
For instance, QT Concurrent [30] is a C11 library for multi-threaded
application; it provides a MapReduce implementation for multi-core compu-
ters. Stanford’s Phoenix [31] is a MapReduce implementation that targets
Application
Machine Learning
Application
Bioonformatics
. . . . . .
MapReduce.NET
Basic Distributed Services of Aneka
Membership
Windows Machine
Windows Machine
Windows Machine
Windows Machine
Failure Detector
Configuration
Deployment
WinDFS (Distributed File System)
CIFS/NTFS
Application
Web Search
FIGURE 14.6. Architecture of Mapreduce.NET [22].
14.4
MAPREDUCE IMPACTS AND RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
385


shared memory architecture, while Kruijf and Sankaralingam implemented
MapReduce for the Cell B.E. architecture [32]. Mars [33] is a MapReduce
framework on graphic processors (GPUs). The Mars framework aims to
provide a generic framework for developers to implement data- and computa-
tion-intensive tasks correctly, efﬁciently, and easily on the GPU.
Hadoop [7], Disco [21], Skynet [26], and GridGain [29] are open-source
implementations of MapReduce for large-scale data processing. Map-Reduce-
Merge [34] is an extension on MapReduce. It adds to MapReduce a merge
phase to easily process data relationships among heterogeneous datasets.
Microsoft Dryad [35] is a distributed execution engine for coarse-grain data
parallel applications. In Dryad, computation tasks are expressed as directed
acyclic graph (DAG).
Other efforts [36, 37] focus on enabling MapReduce to support a wider
range of applications. S. Chen and S. W. Schlosser from Intel are working on
making MapReduce suitable for performing earthquake simulation, image
processing and general machine learning computations [36]. MRPSO [38]
utilizes Hadoop to parallelize a compute-intensive application, called Particle
Swarm Optimization. Research groups from Cornell, Carnegie Mellon, Uni-
versity of Maryland, and PARC are also starting to use Hadoop for both Web
data and non-data-mining applications, like seismic simulation and natural
language processing [39].
At present, many research institutions are working to optimize the perfor-
mance of MapReduce for the cloud. We can classify these works in two
directions:
The ﬁrst one is driven by the simplicity of the MapReduce scheduler. In
Zaharia et al. [40] the authors introduced a new scheduling algorithm called the
Hive
CouchDB
Map-Reduce-Merge
GreenPlum
Aster Data System
Relational Data
Processing
Google MapReduce
The Holumbus Framework
Data-Intensive Applications
Phoenix
QT Concurrent
Mars on GPU
GridGain
MapReduce.net
Data- and Compute-
Intensive
Applications
Multi-core Programming
MapReduce
Hadoop
Filemap
Disco
BashReduce
Skynet
MapSharp
FIGURE 14.7. MapReduce different implementations.
386
THE MAPREDUCE PROGRAMMING MODEL AND IMPLEMENTATIONS


Longest Approximate Time to End (LATE) to improve the performance of
Hadoop in a heterogeneous environment by running “speculative” tasks—that
is, looking for tasks that are running slowly and might possibly fail—and
replicating them on another node just in case they don’t perform. In LATE, the
slow tasks are prioritized based on how much they hurt job response time, and
the number of speculative tasks is capped to prevent thrashing.
The second one is driven by the increasing maturity of virtualization
technology—for example, the successful adoption and use of virtual machines
(VMs) in various distributed systems such as grid [41] and HPC applications
[42, 43]. To this end, some efforts have been proposed to efﬁciently run
MapReduce on VM-based cluster, as in Cloudlet [44] and Tashi [45].
14.5
CONCLUSION
To summarize, we have presented the MapReduce programming model as an
important programming model for next-generation distributed systems, namely
cloud computing. We have introduced the MapReduce metaphor and identiﬁed
some of major MapReduce features. We have introduced some of the major
MapReduce implementations for cloud computing, especially data- and
compute-intensive cloud computing owned by different organizations.
We have presented the different impacts of the MapReduce model in the
computer science discipline, along with different efforts around the world. It
can be observed that while there has been a lot of effort in the development of
different implementations of MapReduce, there is still more to be achieved
in terms of MapReduce optimizations and implementing this simple model in
different areas.
14.5.1
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by National 973 Key Basic Research Program under
Grant 2007CB310900, NSFC under Grants 61073024 and 60973037, Program
for New Century Excellent Talents in University under Grant NCET-07-0334,
Information Technology Foundation of MOE and Intel under Grant MOE-
INTEL-09-03, National High-Tech R&amp;D Plan of China under Grant
2006AA01A115, Important National Science &amp; Technology Speciﬁc
Projects under Grant 2009ZX03004-002, China Next Generation Internet
Project under Grant CNGI2008-109, and Key Project in the National Science
&amp; Technology Pillar Program of China under Grant 2008BAH29B00.
REFERENCES
1.
I. Foster, Yong Zhao, I. Raicu and S. Lu, Cloud computing and grid computing
360-degree compared, in Proceedings of the Grid Computing Environments Work-
shop (GCE ’08), 2008, pp. 110.
REFERENCES
387


2.
A. Szalay, A. Bunn, J. Gray, I. Foster, I. Raicu. The Importance of Data
Locality in Distributed Computing Applications, in Proceedings of NSF Workﬂow,
2006.
3.
A. S. Szalay, P. Z. Kunszt, A. Thakar, J. Gray, D. Slutz, and R. J. Brunner,
Designing and mining multi-terabyte astronomy archives: The Sloan Digital Sky
Survey, in Proceedings of the SIGMOD International Conference on Management of
Data, 2000, pp. 451462.
4.
J. Dean and S. Ghemawat, MapReduce: Simpliﬁed data processing on large
clusters, Communications of the ACM, 51(1):107113, 2008.
5.
S. Ghemawat, H. Gobioff, and S. T. Leung, The Google File System, in
Proceedings of the 19th ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, Lake
George, NY, October, 2003, pp. 2943.
6.
D. A. Patterson, Technical perspective: The data center is the computer, Commu-
nications of the ACM, 51(1):105, 2008, pp. 105105.
7.
Hadoop: http://lucene.apache.org/
8.
Yahoo!, Yahoo! Developer Network, http://developer.yahoo.com/blogs/hadoop/
2008/02/yahoo-worlds-largest-production-hadoop.html (accessed September 2009).
9.
Hadoop, Applications powered by Hadoop: http://wiki.apache.org/hadoop/
PoweredB
10.
Presentation by Randal E. Bryant, Presented in conjunction with the 2007
Federated Computing Research Conference, http://www.cs.cmu.edu/~bryant/
presentations/DISC-FCRC07.ppt.
11.
L. Barroso, J. Dean, and U. Holzle, Web search for a planet: The Google cluster
architecture, IEEE Micro, 23(2), 2003, pp. 2228.
12.
MapReduce in Wikipedia, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MapReduce (accessed
September 2009).
13.
Hadoop in Wikipedia, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hadoop (accessed September
2009).
14.
CNET
news,
http://news.cnet.com/8301-13505_3-10196871-16.html
(accessed
September 2009).
15.
CloudStore (Formerly Kosmos File System), http://kosmosfs.sourceforge.net/
16.
Amazon Simple Storage Service, http://aws.amazon.com/s3/
17.
Ruby
MapReduce
Implementation,
http://en.oreilly.com/rails2008/public/
schedule/detail/2022 (accessed September 2009).
18.
Cloudera Homepage, http://www.cloudera.com/
19.
OpensolarisHadoop Live CD, http://opensolaris.org/os/project/livehadoop/
20.
Amazon Elastic MapReduce, http://aws.amazon.com/elasticmapreduce/
21.
Disco Project Homepage, http://discoproject.org/
22.
C.
Jin
and
R.
Buyya,
MapReduce
programming
model
for.NET-based
cloud computing, in Proceedings of the 15th International European Parallel
Computing Conference (EuroPar 2009), Delft, The Netherlands, August 2528,
2009, pp. 417428.
23.
C. Jin, C. Vecchiola, and R. Buyya, MRPGA: An Extension of MapReduce for
Parallelizing Genetic Algorithms, in Proceedings of 4th IEEE International Con-
ference on e-Science, Indiana, USA, 2008, pp. 214221.
388
THE MAPREDUCE PROGRAMMING MODEL AND IMPLEMENTATIONS


24.
X. Chu, K. Nadiminti, J. Chao, S. Venugopal, and R. Buyya, Aneka: Next-
Generation Enterprise Grid Platform for e-Science and e-Business Applications,
Proceedings of the 3rd IEEE International Conference and Grid Computing,
Bangalore, India, December 1013, 2007, pp. 151159.
25.
Manjrasoft
Products,
http://www.manjrasoft.com/products.html
(accessed
September 2009).
26.
Skynet, http://skynet.rubyforge.org/
27.
Rinda Doc page, http://www.ruby-doc.org/stdlib/libdoc/rinda/rdoc/index.html
28.
Tuplespace
in
Wikipedia,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tuple_space
(accessed
September 2009).
29.
GridGain, http://www.gridgain.com/
30.
QT concurrent Page, http://labs.trolltech.com/page/Projects/Threads/QtConcurrent
31.
C. Ranger, R. Raghuraman, A. Penmetsa, G. Bradski, C. Kozyrakis, Evaluating
MapReduce for Multi-core and Multiprocessor Systems, in Proceedings of the 13th
International Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA),
Phoenix, AZ, February 2007, pp. 1324.
32.
M. Kruijf and K. Sankaralingam, MapReduce for the Cell B. E. Architecture,
TR1625, Technical Report, Department of Computer Sciences, the University of
Wisconsin—Madison, 2007.
33.
B. S. He, W. B. Fang, Q. Luo, N. K. Govindaraju, and T. Y. Wang, Mars: A
MapReduce framework on graphics processors, in Proceedings of the 17th
International Conference on Parallel Architectures and Compilation Techniques,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2008, pp. 260269.
34.
H. C. Yang, A. Dasdan, R. L. Hsiao, and D. S. P. Jr, Map-reduce-merge: Simpliﬁed
relational data processing on large clusters, in Proceedings of SIGMOD, 2007,
pp. 10291040.
35.
M. Isard, M. Budiu, Y. Yu, A. Birrell, and D. Fetterly, Dryad: Distributed data-
parallel programs from sequential building blocks, in Proceedings of the European
Conference on Computer Systems (EuroSys), Lisbon, Portugal, March, 2007,
pp. 5972.
36.
S. Chen, and S. W. Schlosser, Map-Reduce Meets Wider Varieties of Applications,
IRP-TR-08-05, Technical Report, Intel Research Pittsburgh, May 2008.
37.
R. E. Bryant, Data-Intensive Supercomputing: The Case for DISC, CMU-CS-07-
128, Technical Report, Department of Computer Science, Carnegie Mellon
University, May 2007.
38.
A. W. McNabb, C. K. Monson, and K. D. Seppi, Parallel PSO Using MapReduce, in
Proceedings of the Congress on Evolutionary Computation, Singapore, 2007, pp. 714.
39.
Presentations by Steve Schlosser and Jimmy Lin at the 2008 Hadoop Summit,
http://developer.yahoo.com/hadoop/summit/ (accessed September 2009).
40.
M. Zaharia, A. Konwinski, A. D. Joseph, R. Katz, and I. Stoica, Improving
mapreduce performance in heterogeneous environments in, Proceedings of the
8th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation, 2008,
pp. 2942.
41.
R. Figueiredo, P. Dinda, and J. Fortes, A Case for Grid Computing on Virtual
Machines, in Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on Distributed
Computing Systems, 2003, pp. 550559.
REFERENCES
389


42.
M. F. Mergen, V. Uhlig, O. Krieger, and J. Xenidis, Virtualization for high-
performance computing. SIGOPS operating systems review, 40(2):811, 2006.
43.
W. Huang, J. Liu, B. Abali, and D. K. Panda, A case for high performance
computing with virtual machines, in Proceedings of the 20th ACM International
Conference
on
Supercomputing
(ICS’06),
Cairns,
Australia,
June
2006,
pp. 125134.
44.
S. Ibrahim, H. Jin, B. Cheng, H. J. Cao, W. Song and L. Qi, Cloudlet: Towards
MapReduce implementation on Virtual machines, in Proceedings of the 18th ACM
International Symposium on High Performance Distributed Computing (HPDC-
18), Germany, 2009, pp. 6566.
45.
Tashi Homepage, http://www.pittsburgh.intel-research.net/projects/tashi/, 2009.
46.
Baidu search engine, www.baidu.com
47.
NetSeerHomePage, http://www.netseer.com/
48.
A9.com Homepage, www.a9.com
49.
Facebook Homepage, www.facebook.com/
50.
Manjrasoft
customers,
http://www.manjrasoft.com/customers.html
(accessed
September 2009).
51.
Medvoxel homepage, http://www.medvoxel.com/
52.
Pointoyalty Homepage, http://www.pointloyalty.ru/
53.
Traﬁcon Homepage, http://www.traﬁcon.com/
54.
Amazon Elastic MapReduce, http://aws.amazon.com/ec2/
55.
IBM Blue Cloud Announcement, http://www-03.ibm.com/press/us/en/pressrelease/
22613.wss, (accessed September 2009).
390
THE MAPREDUCE PROGRAMMING MODEL AND IMPLEMENTATIONS


PART IV
MONITORING AND MANAGEMENT


CHAPTER 15
AN ARCHITECTURE FOR FEDERATED
CLOUD COMPUTING
BENNY ROCHWERGER, CONSTANTINO VA´ ZQUEZ, DAVID
BREITGAND, DAVID HADAS, MASSIMO VILLARI, PHILIPPE
MASSONET, ELIEZER LEVY, ALEX GALIS, IGNACIO M. LLORENTE,
RUBE´ N S. MONTERO, YARON WOLFSTHAL, KENNETH NAGIN, LARS
LARSSON, and FERMI´N GALA´ N
15.1
INTRODUCTION
Utility computing, a concept envisioned back in the 1960s, is ﬁnally becoming a
reality. Just as we can power a variety of devices, ranging from a simple light
bulb to complex machinery, by plugging them into the wall, today we can
satisfy, by connecting to the Internet, many of our computing needs, ranging
from full pledge productivity applications to raw compute power in the form of
virtual machines. Cloud computing [1], in all its different forms, is rapidly
gaining momentum as an alternative to traditional IT, and the reasons for this
are clear: In principle, it allows individuals and companies to fulﬁll all their IT
needs with minimal investment and controlled expenses (both capital and
operational).
Cloud computing enables companies and individuals to lease resources on-
demand from a virtually unlimited pool. The “pay as you go” billing model
applies charges for the actually used resources per unit time. This way, a
business can optimize its IT investment and improve availability and
scalability.
While cloud computing holds a lot of promise for enterprise computing,
there are a number of inherent deﬁciencies in current offerings such as:
Cloud Computing: Principles and Paradigms,
Edited by Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg and
Andrzej Goscinski
Copyright r 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
393


 Inherently Limited Scalability of Single-Provider Clouds. Although most
infrastructure cloud providers today claim inﬁnite scalability, in reality it
is reasonable to assume that even the largest players may start facing
scalability problems as cloud computing usage rate increases. In the long
term, scalability problems may be expected to worsen as cloud providers
serve an increasing number of on-line services, each accessed by massive
amounts of global users at all times.
 Lack of Interoperability Among Cloud Providers. Contemporary cloud
technologies have not been designed with interoperability in mind. This
results in an inability to scale through business partnerships across clouds
providers. In addition, it prevents small and medium cloud infrastructure
providers from entering the cloud provisioning market. Overall, this stiﬂes
competition and locks consumers to a single vendor.
 No Built-In Business Service Management Support. Business Service
Management (BSM) is a management strategy that allows businesses to
align their IT management with their high-level business goals. The key
aspect of BSM is service-level agreement (SLA) management. Current
cloud computing solutions are not designed to support the BSM practices
that are well established in the daily management of the enterprise IT
departments. As a result, enterprises looking at transforming their IT
operations to cloud-based technologies face a non-incremental and
potentially disruptive step.
To address these issues, we present in this chapter a model for business-driven
federation of cloud computing providers, where each provider can buy and sell,
on-demand, capacity from other providers (see Figure 15.1).
In this chapter we analyze the requirements for an enterprise-grade cloud
computing offering and identify the main functional components that should
be part of such offering. In addition, we develop from the requirement the basic
principles that we believe are the cornerstone of future cloud computing
offerings. The remainder of this chapter is organized as follows: In Section
15.2 we will present use cases and requirements, and in Section 15.3 we expand
on the principles of cloud computing derived from these requirements. In
Section 15.4 we will present a model for federated cloud computing infra-
structure and provide deﬁnitions of the concepts used and in Section 15.5 we
describe the seurity considerations for such system. We conclude with a
summary in Section 15.6.
15.2
A TYPICAL USE CASE
As a representative of an enterprise-grade application, we have chosen to
analyze SAPt systems and to derive from them general requirements that such
application might have from a cloud computing provider.
394
AN ARCHITECTURE FOR FEDERATED CLOUD COMPUTING


15.2.1
SAP Systems
SAP systems are used for a variety of business applications that differ by
version and functionality [such as customer relationship management (CRM)
and enterprise resource planning (ERP)]. For a given application type, the SAP
system components consist of generic parts customized by conﬁguration and
parts custom-coded for a speciﬁc installation. Certain SAP applications are
composed of several loosely coupled systems. Such systems have independent
databases and communicate asynchronously by message with each other.
An SAP system is a typical three-tier system (see Figure 15.2) as follows:
 Requests are handled by the SAP Web dispatcher.
 In the middle tier, there are two types of components: multiple stateful
dialog instances (DIs) and a single central instance (CI) that performs
central services such as application-level locking, messaging, and registra-
tion of DIs. The number of DIs can be changed while the system is
running to adapt to load.
 A single database management system (DBMS) serves the SAP system.
(a)
(b)
(c)
A Public Cloud
My Private Cloud
My Private Cloud
FIGURE 15.1. Model for federated cloud computing: (a) Different cloud providers
collaborate by sharing their resources while keeping thick walls in between them; that is,
each is an independent autonomous entity. (b) Applications running in this cloud of
clouds should be unaware of location; that is, virtual local networks are needed for the
inter-application components to communicate. (c) Cloud providers differentiate from
each in terms of cost and trust level; for example, while a public cloud maybe cheap,
companies will be reluctant to put in there sensitive services.
15.2
A TYPICAL USE CASE
395


The components can be arranged in a variety of conﬁgurations, from a minimal
conﬁguration where all components run on a single machine, to larger ones
where there are several DIs, each running on a separate machine, and a
separate machine with the CI and the DBMS (see Figure 15.3)
15.2.2
The Virtualized Data Center Use Case
Consider a data center that consolidates the operation of different types of SAP
applications and all their respective environments (e.g., test, production) using
virtualization technology. The applications are offered as a service to external
customers, or, alternatively, the data center is operated by the IT department of
an enterprise for internal users (i.e., enterprise employees).
A special variation that deserves mentioning is when the data center serves
an on-demand, Software as a Service (SaaS) setup, where customers are
external and where each customer (tenant) gets the same base version of the
application. However, each tenant conﬁgures and customizes the application to
suit his speciﬁc needs. It is reasonable to assume that a tenant in this case is a
small or medium business (SMB) tenant.
We brieﬂy mention here a few aspects that are typical of virtualized data
centers:
Web Dispatcher
DBMS
Storage
Presentation Layer
Application Layer
Database Layer
DI
CI
DI
Browser
FIGURE 15.2. Abstraction of an SAP system.
396
AN ARCHITECTURE FOR FEDERATED CLOUD COMPUTING


 The infrastructure provider must manage the life cycle of the application
for hundreds or thousands of tenants while keeping a very low total cost
of ownership (TCO). This includes setting up new tenants, backing up the
databases, managing the customizations and conﬁgurations of tenants,
and getting patches and newer versions of the software from SAP (the
service provider).
 Setting up a new tenant in the SaaS for SMBs case is completely
automated by a Web-based wizard. The new tenant runs through a series
of conﬁguration questions and uploads master data items (e.g., product
catalog and customer lists). Following these steps, the tenant is up and
running, typically using a trial version. The provisioning of the resources
(storage, database, and application server) is part of this automated setup.
 The customers are billed a ﬁxed monthly subscription fee or a variable fee
based on their usage of the application.
 There are several well-known approaches to multi-tenancy of the same
database schema [2]. Regardless of the approach taken, multi-tenancy
calls for ﬂexible virtualization schemes where, for example, the DBMS
component and the storage system are shared between multiple tenants.
The main reason for this sharing is to keep the TCO per tenant at a
minimum.
Virtual Execution Environment Host
DI/CI
DBMS
DI/CI
DBMS
DI/CI
DBMS
Virtual Execution Environment Host
CI
DBMS
DI
DI
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 15.3. Sample SAP system deployments. (a) All components run in the same
virtual execution environment (represented as rounded rectangles); (b) the large
components (CI and DBMS) run each on a dedicated virtual execution environment.
The virtual execution environment host refers to the set of components managing the
virtual environments.
15.2
A TYPICAL USE CASE
397


In summary, the key challenges in all these use cases from the point of view
of the infrastructure provider are:
 Managing thousands of different service components that comprise a
variety of service applications executed by thousands of virtual execution
environments, on top of a complex infrastructure that also includes
network and storage systems.
 Consolidating many applications on the same infrastructure, thereby
increasing HW utilization and optimizing power consumption, while
keeping the operational cost at minimum.
 Guaranteeing the individual SLAs of the many customers of the data
center who face different and ﬂuctuating workloads.
15.2.3
Primary Requirements
From the use case discussed in the previous section, we derived the following
main requirements from a cloud computing infrastructure:
 Automated and Fast Deployment. The cloud should support automated
provisioning of complex service applications based on a formal contract
specifying theinfrastructure SLAs. The same contract should be reused to
provision multiple instances of the same application for different tenants
with different customizations.
 Dynamic Elasticity. The cloud should dynamically adjust resource alloca-
tion parameters (memory, CPU, network bandwidth, storage) of indivi-
dual virtual execution environments seamlessly. Moreover, the number of
virtual execution environments must be dynamically and seamlessly
adjusted to adapt to the changing load.
 Automated Continuous Optimization. The cloud should continuously
optimize alignment of infrastructure resources management with the
high-level business goals.
15.3
THE BASIC PRINCIPLES OF CLOUD COMPUTING
In this section we unravel a set of principles that enable Internet scale cloud
computing services. We seek to highlight the fundamental requirement from the
providers of cloud computing to allow virtual applications to freely migrate,
grow, and shrink.
15.3.1
Federation
All cloud computing providers, regardless of how big they are, have a ﬁnite
capacity. To grow beyond this capacity, cloud computing providers should be
398
AN ARCHITECTURE FOR FEDERATED CLOUD COMPUTING


able to form federations of providers such that they can collaborate and share
their resources. The need for federation-capable cloud computing offerings is
also derived from the industry trend of adopting the cloud computing paradigm
internally within companies to create private clouds and then being able to
extend these clouds with resources leased on-demand from public clouds.
Any federation of cloud computing providers should allow virtual application
to be deployed across federated sites. Furthermore, virtual applications need to
be completely location free and allowed to migrate in part or as a whole between
sites. At the same time, the security privacy and independence of the federation
members must be maintained to allow competing providers to federate.
15.3.2
Independence
Just as in other utilities, where we get service without knowing the internals
of the utility provider and with standard equipment not speciﬁc to any provider
(e.g., telephones), for cloud computing services to really fulﬁll the computing as
a utility vision, we need to offer cloud computing users full independence. Users
should be able to use the services of the cloud without relying on any provider-
speciﬁc tool, and cloud computing providers should be able to manage their
infrastructure without exposing internal details to their customers or partners.
As a consequence of the independence principle, all cloud services need to be
encapsulated and generalized such that users will be able to acquire equivalent
virtual resources at different providers.
15.3.3
Isolation
Cloud computing services are, by deﬁnition, hosted by a provider that will
simultaneously host applications from many different users. For these users to
move their computing into the cloud, they need warranties from the cloud
computing provider that their stuff is completely isolated from others. Users
must be ensured that their resources cannot be accessed by others sharing the
same cloud and that adequate performance isolation is in place to ensure that
no other user may possess the power to directly effect the service granted to
their application.
15.3.4
Elasticity
One of the main advantages of cloud computing is the capability to provide, or
release, resources on-demand. These “elasticity” capabilities should be enacted
automatically by cloud computing providers to meet demand variations, just as
electrical companies are able (under normal operational circumstances) to
automatically deal with variances in electricity consumption levels. Clearly the
behavior and limits of automatic growth and shrinking should be driven by
contracts and rules agreed on between cloud computing providers and
consumers.
15.3
THE BASIC PRINCIPLES OF CLOUD COMPUTING
399


The ability of users to grow their applications when facing an increase of
real-life demand need to be complemented by the ability to scale. Cloud
computing services as offered by a federation of infrastructure providers is
expected to offer any user application of any size the ability to quickly scale up
its application by unrestricted magnitude and approach Internet scale. At the
same time, user applications should be allowed to scale down facing decreasing
demand. Such scalability although depended on the internals of the user
application is prime driver for cloud computing because it help users to better
match expenses with gain.
15.3.5
Business Orientation
Before enterprises move their mission critical applications to the cloud, cloud
computing providers will need to develop the mechanisms to ensure quality of
service (QoS) and proper support for service-level agreements (SLAs). More
than ever before, cloud computing offers challenges with regard to the
articulation of a meaningful language that will help encompass business
requirements and that has translatable and customizable service parameters
for infrastructure providers.
15.3.6
Trust
Probably the most critical issue to address before cloud computing can become
the preferred computing paradigm is that of establishing trust. Mechanisms to
build and maintain trust between cloud computing consumers and cloud
computing providers, as well as between cloud computing providers among
themselves, are essential for the success of any cloud computing offering.
15.4
A MODEL FOR FEDERATED CLOUD COMPUTING
In our model for federated cloud computing we identify two major types of
actors: Service Providers (SPs) are the entities that need computational
resources to offer some service. However, SPs do not own these resources;
instead, they lease them from Infrastructure Providers (IPs), which provide
them with a seemingly inﬁnite pool of computational, network, and storage
resources.
A Service Application is a set of software components that work collectively
to achieve a common goal. Each component of such service applications
executes in a dedicated VEE. SPs deploy service applications in the the cloud by
providing to a IP, known as the primary site, with a Service Manifest—that is, a
document that deﬁnes the structure of the application as well as the contract
and SLA between the SP and the IP.
To create the illusion of an inﬁnite pool of resources, IPs shared their unused
capacity with each other to create a federation cloud. A Framework Agreement
400
AN ARCHITECTURE FOR FEDERATED CLOUD COMPUTING


is document that deﬁnes the contract between two IPs—that is, it states the
terms and conditions under which one IP can use resources from another IP.
Within each IP, optimal resource utilization is achieved by partitioning
physical resources, through a virtualization layer, into Virtual Execution
Environments (VEEs)—fully isolated runtime environments that abstract
away the physical characteristics of the resource and enable sharing. We refer
to the virtualized computational resources, alongside the virtualization layer
and all the management enablement components, as the Virtual Execution
Enviroment Host (VEEH).
With these concepts in mind, we can proceed to deﬁne a reference
architecture for federated cloud computing. The design and implementation
of such architecure are the main goals of the RESERVOIR European research
project. The RESERVOIR architecture [3], shown in Figure 15.4, identiﬁes the
major functional components needed within an IP to fully support the cloud
computing paradigm. The rationale behind this particular layering is to keep a
clear separation of concerns and responsibilities and to hide low-level infra-
structure details and decisions from high-level management and service
providers.
 The Service Manager is the only component within an IP that interacts
with SPs. It receives Service Manifests, negotiates pricing, and handles
Service Manager
VEE Manager (VEEM)
VEE Host (VEEH)
(e.g., Hypervisor)
Manifest
SMI
VMI
VMI
VMI
VMI
Infrastructure Provider (IP)
Service Provider (SP)
SLA
SLA
FIGURE 15.4. The RESERVOIR architecture: major components and interfaces.
15.4
A MODEL FOR FEDERATED CLOUD COMPUTING
401


billing. Its two most complex tasks are (1) deploying and provisioning
VEEs based on the Service Manifest and (2) monitoring and enforcing
SLA compliance by throttling a service application’s capacity.
 The Virtual Execution Environment Manager (VEEM) is responsible for
the optimal placement of VEEs into VEE Hosts subject to constraints
determined by the Service Manager. The continuous optimization process
is driven by a site-speciﬁc programmable utility function. The VEEM is
free to place and move VEEs anywhere, even on the remote sites (subject
to overall cross-site agreements), as long as the placement satisﬁes the
constraints. Thus, in addition to serving local requests (from the local
Service Manager), VEEM is responsible for the federation of remote sites.
 The Virtual Execution Environment Host (VEEH) is responsible for the
basic control and monitoring of VEEs and their resources (e.g., creating a
VEE, allocating additional resources to a VEE, monitoring a VEE,
migrating a VEE, creating a virtual network and storage pool, etc.).
Given that VEEs belonging to the same application may be placed on
multiple VEEHs and even extend beyond the boundaries of a site, VEEHs
must support isolated virtual networks that span VEEHs and sites.
Moreover, VEEHs must support transparent VEE migration to any
compatible VEEH within the federated cloud, regardless of site location
or network and storage conﬁgurations.
The layered design stresses the use of standard, open, and generic protocols
and interfaces to support vertical and horizontal interoperability between
layers. Different implementations of each layer will be able to interact with
each other. The Service Management Interface (SMI) with its service manifest
exposes a standardized interface into the RESERVOIR cloud for service
providers. The service provider may then choose among RESERVOIR cloud
providers, knowing that they share a common language to express their
business requirements. The VEE Management Interface (VMI) simpliﬁes the
introduction of different and independent IT optimization strategies without
disrupting other layers or peer VEEMs. Furthermore, VMI’s support of
VEEM-to-VEEM communication simpliﬁes cloud federation by limiting the
horizontal interoperability to one layer of the stack. The VEE Host Interface
(VHI) will support plugging-in of new virtualization platforms (e.g., hypervi-
sors), without requiring VEEM recompilation or restart. RESERVOIR’s
loosely coupled stack reference architecture should promote a variety of
innovative approaches to support cloud computing.
15.4.1
Features of Federation Types
Federations of clouds may be constructed in various ways, with disparate
feature sets offered by the underlying implementation architecture. This section
is devoted to present these differentiating features. Using these features as a
402
AN ARCHITECTURE FOR FEDERATED CLOUD COMPUTING
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>


base, a number of federation scenarios are deﬁned, comprised of subsets of this
feature set.
The ﬁrst feature to consider is the framework agreement support: Frame-
work agreements, as deﬁned in the previous section, may either be supported by
the architecture or not. If framework agreements are not supported, this implies
that federation may only be carried out in a more ad hoc opportunistic manner.
Another feature is the opportunistic placement support. If framework agree-
ments are not supported by the architecture, or if there is not enough spare
capacity even including the framework agreements, a site may choose to
perform opportunistic placement. It is a process where remote sites are queried
on-demand as the need for additional resources arises, and the local site
requests a certain SLA-governed capacity for a given cost from the remote sites.
One interesting feature to take into account is the advance resource reserva-
tion support. This feature may be used both when there is an existing framework
agreement and when opportunistic placement has been performed. Both types
of advance reservations are only valid for a certain time, since they impact the
utilization of resources at a site. Because of this impact, they should be billed as
actual usage during the active time interval.
The ability to migrate machines across sites deﬁnes the federated migration
support. There are two types of migration: cold and hot (or live). In cold
migration, the VEE is suspended and experiences a certain amount of down-
time while it is being transferred. Most modern operating systems have support
for being suspended, which includes saving all RAM contents to disk and later
restoring the runtime state to its prior state. Hot or live migration does not
allow for system downtime, and it works by transferring the runtime state while
the VEE is still running.
Focusing on networks, there can be cross-site virtual network support: VEEs
belonging to a service are potentially connected to virtual networks, should this
be requested by the SP. Ideally, these virtual networks will span across sites.
However, this requires substantial effort and advanced features of the under-
lying architecture. In the same line, the federation can offer public IP addresses
retention post cross-site migration. With fully virtualized networks, this may be
a directly supported feature; but even if virtualized networks are not available,
it may still be possible to maintain public IP addresses by manipulating routing
information.
Information disclosure within the federation has also to be taken into account.
The sites in the federation may provide information to different degrees (for
instance, the information exchange between sites may be larger within the same
administrative domain than outside it). Information regarding deployed VEEs
will be primarily via the monitoring system, whereas some information may
also potentially be exposed via the VMI as response to a VEE deployment
request.
The last identiﬁed feature useful to deﬁne scenario is the VMI operation
support: Depending on the requirements of the federation scenario, only a
subset of the VMI operations may be made available. Which operations are
15.4
A MODEL FOR FEDERATED CLOUD COMPUTING
403


required may be related to the amount of information that is exposed by the
remote sites; access to more information may also increase the possibility and
need to manipulate the deployed VEEs.
15.4.2
Federation Scenarios
In this section, a number of federation scenarios are presented, ranging from a
baseline case to a full-featured federation. These scenarios have various
requirements on the underlying architecture, and we use the features presented
in previous section as the basis for differentiating among them.
The baseline federation scenario provides only the very basic required for
supporting opportunistic placement of VEEs at a remote site. Migration is
not supported, nor does it resize the VEEs once placed at the remote site.
Advanced features such as virtual networks across site boundaries are also not
supported. The baseline federation should be possible to build on top of most
public cloud offerings, which is important for interoperability. The basic
federation scenario includes a number of features that the baseline federation
does not, such as framework agreements, cold migration, and retention of
public IP addresses. Notably missing is (a) support for hot migration and (b)
cross-site virtual network functionality. This scenario offers a useful cloud
computing federation with support for site collaboration in terms of frame-
work agreements without particularly high technological requirements on the
underlying architecture in terms of networking support. The advanced federa-
tion scenario offers advanced functionality such as cross-site virtual network
support. The feature most notably missing is hot migration, and the monitor-
ing system also does not disclose VEE substate metadata information. The full-
featured federation scenario offers the most complete set of features, including
hot migration of VEEs.
15.4.3
Layers Enhancement for Federation
Taking into account the different types of federation, a summary of the features
needed in the different layers of the RESERVOIR architecture to achieve
federation is presented.
Service Manager. The baseline federation is the most basic federation
scenario, but even here the SM must be allowed to specify placement
restrictions when a service is deployed. Deployment restrictions are associated
to an speciﬁc VEE (although the restriction expression could involve other
VEEs, as can be seen in the afﬁnity restrictions above) and passed down to the
VEEM along with any other speciﬁc VEE metadata when the VEE is issued for
creation through VMI. They specify a set of constraints that must be held when
the VEE is created, so they can be seen as some kind of “contour conditions”
that determine the domain that can be used by the placement algorithm run at
VEEM layer. Two kinds of deployment restrictions are envisioned: First, there
404
AN ARCHITECTURE FOR FEDERATED CLOUD COMPUTING


are afﬁnity restrictions, related to the relations between VEEs; and second,
there can be site restrictions, related to sites.
In the basic federation scenario, federation uses framework agreement (FA)
between organizations to set the terms and conditions for federation. Frame-
work agreements are negotiated and deﬁned by individuals, but they are
encoded at the end in the service manager (SM)—in particular, within the
business information data base (BIDB). The pricing information included in
the FA is used by the SM to calculate the cost of resources running in remote
systems (based on the aggregated usage information that it received from the
local VEEM) and correlate this information with the charges issued by those
remote sites. The SM should be able to include as part of the VEE metadata a
“price hint vector” consisting on a sequence of numbers, each one representing
an estimation of the relative cost of deploying the VEE on each federated site.
The SM calculate this vector based on the FA established with the other sites.
Given that the advanced federation scenario supports migration, the place-
ment restrictions have to be checked not only at service deployment time but
also for migration. In addition, the SM could update the deployment restric-
tions during the service lifespan, thereby changing the “contour conditions”
used by the placement algorithm. When the VEE is migrated across sites, its
deployment restrictions are included along with any other metadata associated
with the VEE. On the other hand, no additional functionality is needed from
the service manager to implement the full-featured federation.
Virtual Execution Environment Manager. Very little is needed in the
baseline federation scenario of the VEEM. The only requirement will be the
ability to deploy a VEE in the remote site, so it will need a plug-in that can
communicate with the remote cloud by invoking the public API. This will
satisfy the opportunistic placement requirement. For the different features
offered by the basic federation scenario, the VEEM will need framework
agreement, since it is necessary that the VEEM implement a way to tell
whether it can take care of the VEE or not, attending to the SLAs deﬁned in
the framework agreement. The best module in the VEEM for the SLA
evaluation to take place is the admission control of the policy engine. Also,
cold migration is needed; therefore the VEEM needs the ability to signal the
hypervisor to save the VEE state (this is part of the VEEM life-cycle module)
and also the ability to transfer the state ﬁles to the remote site. Additionally, the
VEEM need to be able to signal the hypervisor to restore the VEE state and
resume its execution (also part of the VEEM life-cycle module). Regarding
advance resource reservation support, the policy engine must be capable of
reservingcapacityinthephysical infrastructuregiven atimeframeforcertainVEEs.
In the advanced federation scenario, the ability to create cross-site virtual
networks for the VEEs has to be achieved using the functionality offered by the
virtual application network (VAN) as part of the virtual host interface API.
Therefore, the VEEM needs to correctly interface with the VAN and be able to
express the virtual network characteristics in a VEEM-to-VEEM connection.
15.4
A MODEL FOR FEDERATED CLOUD COMPUTING
405


In the full-featured federation scenario the live migration feature offered by this
scenario will need to be supported also in the VHI API. The VEEM will just
need to invoke the functionality of live migration to the hypervisor part of the
VHI API to achieve live migration across administrative domains.
Virtual Execution Environment Host. The ability to monitor a federation is
needed. The RESERVOIR monitoring service supports the asynchronous
monitoring of a cloud data centers0 VEEHs, their VEEs, and the applications
running inside the VEEs. To support federation, the originating data center
must be able to monitor VEEs and their applications running at a remote site.
When an event occurs related to a VEE running on a remote site, it is published
and a remote proxy forwards the request to the subscribing local proxy, which
in turn publishes the event to the waiting local subscribers. The monitoring
framework is agnostic to type and source of data being monitored and supports
the dynamic creation of new topics.
No further functionality is required for the basic federation in the VEEH
apart from the features described for the baseline scenario. On the other hand,
for the advanced federation one, several features are needed. First, it must have
the ability to implement federated network service with virtual application
network (VANs), a novel overlay network that enables virtual network services
across subnets and across administrative boundaries [8,9]. VANs enables the
establishment of large-scale virtual networks, free of any location dependency,
that in turn allows completely “migratable” virtual networks. (1) The offered
virtual network service is fully isolated, (2) it enables sharing of hosts, network
devices, and physical connections, and (3) hides network related physical
characteristics such as link throughputs, location of hosts, and so forth.
Also, the ability to do federated migration with non-shared storage service
is required. RESERVOIR enhances the standard VM migration capability
typically available in every modern hypervisor with support for environments
in which the source and the destination hosts do not share storage; typically the
disk(s) of the migrated VM resided in the shared storage.
Regarding the full-featured federation scenario, hot migration is the func-
tionality that affects the most what is demanded from VEEH in this scenario.
RESERVOIR’s separation principle requires that each RESERVOIR site be an
autonomous entity. Site conﬁguration, topology, and so on, are not shared
between sites. So one site is not aware of the host addresses on another site.
However, currently VM migration between hosts require that the source and
destination hypervisors know each other’s addresses and transfer a VM directly
from the source host to the destination host. In order to overcome this apparent
contradiction, RESERVOIR introduces a novel federated migration channel to
transfer a VEE from one host to another host without directly addressing the
destination host. Instead of transferring the VEE directly to the destination
host, it passes through proxies at the source site and destination site, solving the
unknown hypervisor location problem.
406
AN ARCHITECTURE FOR FEDERATED CLOUD COMPUTING


15.5
SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
As previously reported, virtualized service-oriented infrastructures provide
computing as a commodity for today’s competitive businesses. Besides cost-
effectiveness, they also ensure optimized use of system and network resources,
reduced carbon footprints, and simplify management of their underlying
resources. Businesses around the world are therefore giving enormous attention
to virtualized SOI technology nowadays [4]. The capability of using virtual
resources across the Internet is making up throughout a new kind of
computation infrastructures. These platforms presented an unspeciﬁed envir-
onment where it is possible to run any type of VEEs. However, the salient
features of these virtualization infrastructures give rise to a number of security
concerns. These security threats are now emerging as the biggest obstacle in the
widespread deployment of virtual infrastructures for cloud computing. Security
concerns are multiplying with an increasing number of reported cloud comput-
ing incidents and other on-line services incidents such as the Kaminsky
DNS vulnerability [5]. According to a survey results published in the Guardian
newspaper, cloud computing security was the foremost concern for the year
2009 [6]. The higher stakes and broader scope of the security requirements of
virtualization infrastructures require comprehensive security solutions because
they are critical to ensure the anticipated adoption of virtualization solutions
by their users and providers. The conception of a comprehensive security model
requires a realistic threat model. Without such a threat model, security
designers risk wasting time and effort implementing safeguards that do not
address any realistic threat.
Or, just as dangerously, they run the risk of concentrating their security
measures on one threat while leaving the underlying architecture dangerously
exposed to others. Threats of large-scale cross-border virtualization infrastruc-
tures are broadly classiﬁed into two major categories, namely, external threats
and internal threats, so as to complement the DolevYao threat model [4].
15.5.1
External Threats
The Internet represents the same origin of threats for the communication across
the RESERVOIR sites (VMI interfaces) and outside the RESERVOIR sites
both for the SMI interface and service interface (SI—interface for service user
on Internet). Some threats, related to communication, can be classiﬁed as: men-
in-the-middle, TCP hijacking (spooﬁng), service manifest attacks (malicious
manifest/SLA format injection), migration and security policies and identity
theft/impersonation (SP or RESERVOIR site pretends to be someone else), and
so on. The main goals of these threats are to gain unauthorized access to systems
and to impersonate another entity on the network. These techniques allow
the attackers to eavesdrop as well as to change, delete, or divert data. All the
interfaces could be instead exposed to the following attacks: denial of service
(DoS or distributed DoS), ﬂooding, buffer overﬂow, p2p-attacks, and so on.
15.5
SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
407


These kind of threats are aimed toward provoking a system crash, leading to the
inability to perform ordinary functions. All the interfaces (SMI, VMI and SI)
are affected by the same issues, but we have to underline that the solutions in
some cases are different. Considering the VMI interfaces, the RESERVOIR
system administrator has the full capability to manage security policies and to
apply them on both the sides (endpoints of site A and site B). It is possible for
each RESERVOIR site to select its own security framework; however, in the
case of communication between SM and SP (SMI), the RESERVOIR cloud
has to use a common security framework shared with many different partners
(SPs). All threats related to SI are managed through a simple monitoring,
because no action can be performed.
15.5.2
Internal Threats
Each RESERVOIR site has a logical representation with three different layers,
but these layers can be compounded by one or more hardware components.
Figure 15.5 gives an overview of these entities and relative mapping with a
simpliﬁed view of the hardware. It is possible to split the site in two different
virtual zones: control and execution zone; in the control zone the components
are: Service Manager (SM), VEEM (in bridge conﬁguration between control
SP
SP
Router
Router
Switch
Switch
Service
Manager
VEE
Manager
Server
Front-End Web
VM image
Local Storage
VM image
Local Storage
VM image
Local Storage
Internet
S
VH
Manager
HOST
HOST
Interface for
Internet User
3- SI
SITE: Execution zone
SITE: Control zone
User
VHI
1 - SMI
2 - VMI
VM image
Remote Storage
VM image
Remote Storage
FIGURE 15.5. RESERVOIR site: internal representation.
408
AN ARCHITECTURE FOR FEDERATED CLOUD COMPUTING


and execution zone), network components (router, switch, cable, etc.), SMI/
VMI interfaces, and VHI internal interface.
In the execution zone instead there are: VEEH, VEEM (in-bridge conﬁg-
uration between control and execution zone), VHI internal interface, network
components (router, switch, cable, etc.), network storage (NAS, databases,
etc.), and SI (user access interfaces).
The control zone can be considered a trusted area. Some threats can appear
through the SMI and VEEM interfaces, since they fall into the same cases of
external threats. The ﬁrewall located next to the router increases the trust-
worthiness. In this zone the weak ring of the system is represented by the
VEEM. It is the bridge between two areas, and it allows the exchange of data
among the zones. Figure 15.5 shows a ﬁrewall close to the VEEM, added to
prevent any attacks from the execution area. The zone with a high level of risk is
represented by the execution zone. This area shares all the hardware compo-
nents. The hypervisor (VEEH) uses the network, storage, CPU, and ram (host)
to load and execute all the VEEs. To better explain the role of each component,
it can be useful to evaluate chronologically all the phases necessary to execute a
virtual execution environment (VEEH); once all the requirements from the
VEEM are received, it downloads the VM image from the SP, stores the image
into the NAS, performs the setup conﬁguration, and executes the VM. The
internal threats related to these phases can be classiﬁed as follows: (1) threats
linked to authentication/communication of SPs and other RESERVOIR site;
(2) threats related to misbehavior of service resource allocation—to alter the
agreement (manifest) during the translation between service manager and
VEEM malicious component on SM; (3) data export control legislation—on
an international cloud or between two clouds; (4) threats linked to fake
command for placement of VEEs and compromising the data integrity of
the distributed ﬁle system (NFS, SAMBA, CIFS); (5) storage data compromis-
ing (fake VEE image); (6) threats linked to compromise data privacy; (7) threats
linked to the underlying hypervisor and OS (VEE could break hypervisor/
underlying OS security and access other VEE); and (8) data partitioning
between VEE.
To avoid any fraudulent access, the VEEH has to verify authentication/
communication of SPs and other RESERVOIR sites. Thus, the same behavior is
analyzed for all the communications in external threats.
Relatively to the latter group of threats (3,4,56,7,8), the RESERVOIR site
has to guarantee different types of isolation—that is, runtime isolation, network
isolation, and storage isolation.
Runtime isolation resolves all the security problems with the underlying OS.
The hypervisor security mechanisms need to be used to provide the isolation.
Network isolation is addressed via the dynamic conﬁguration of network
policies and via virtual circuits that involve routers and switches.
To avoid fake VEE image loading and do not compromise data privacy,
storage isolation has to be performed and secure protocols has to be used.
Protocols like NFS, SAMBA, and CIFS are not secure.
15.5
SECURITY CONSIDERATIONS
409


Virtual execution environment, downloaded from any generic SP, can
expose the infrastructure toward back door threats, spooﬁng threats and
malicious code execution (virus, worm, and Trojan horse). The RESERVOIR
site administrator needs to know at any time the state of threats, with a strong
monitoring of the execution zone, through the runtime intrusion detection.
15.6
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
Cloud computing as a new computing paradigm has the potential of drama-
tically changing the way we use computers. Just as in the early days of the
power grid, nobody could have imagined fully automated robotic production
plants, or the high-deﬁnition TVs in our houses, today we can’t really predict
what will happen once the computing utility dream becomes a reality. As this
new paradigm becomes prevalent, there are many exciting opportunities: Cloud
computing providers will probably achieve levels of efﬁciency and utilization
that seem imaginary just a few years ago, while consumers of cloud computing
services will be able to free resources and focuses on their business. However,
along the way there are many challenges that the industry needs to deal with.
First of all, just in the case of the power grid, interoperability between cloud
providers and standardization are a fundamental need. Second, cloud providers
will need to build mechanisms to ensure the service levels; without proper
warranties on the levels of reliability, serviceability, and availability, companies
are going to be reluctant to move any of the more critical operations to the
cloud. Last, but not least, the need to build trust is essential and probably
the hardest because it is not a technical issue only.
In this chapter we presented the RESERVOIR model for cloud computing
that deals with these issues and extended on federation and security. RESER-
VOIR’s work on business orientation management is left for future publications.
15.6.1
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the following people Irit Loy and Shimon Agassi from
IBM, Juan Caceres and Luis Vaquero from Telefo´ nica I&D, Stuart Clayman
from UCL, and Erik Elmroth and Johan Tordsson from Umea˚ ; without their
help, this work would not have been possible.
The research leading to these results is partially supported by the European
Community’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2001-2013) under grant
agreement 215605.
REFERENCES
1.
M. Armbrust et al., Above the Clouds: A Berkeley View of Cloud Computing,
Technical Report, University of California, Berkeley, 2009.
410
AN ARCHITECTURE FOR FEDERATED CLOUD COMPUTING


2.
S. Aulbach, T. Gurst, D. Jacobs, A. Kemper, and J. Rittinger, Multi-tenant
databases for software as a service, in Proceedings of the ACM SIGMOD Interna-
tional Conference on Management of Data, June 2008, pp. 11951206.
3.
B. Rochwerger et al., The reservoir model and architecture for open federated cloud
computing, IBM Journal of Research and Development, 53(4), 2009.
4.
D. Dolev, and A. C. Yao, On the Security of Public Key Protocols, in Proceedings
of the IEEE 22nd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, 1982,
pp. 350357.
5.
M. Olney, P. Mullen, K. Miklavcic, and D. Kaminsky, 2008 DNS Vulnerability,
Sourceﬁre Vulnerability Research Team Report, July 2008.
6.
K. Bevan, What will frighten us next year?, the guardian newspaper, December 2008.
http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2008/dec/11/security-cloud-computing
7.
N. Kolakowski, IBM User Group Survey Says Virtualization, Cloud Computing on
the Rise, http://www.eweek.com/c/a/IT-Infrastructure/IBM-User-Group-Survey-
Says-Virtualization-Cloud-Computing-on-the-Rise, January 2009.
8.
D. Hadas, S. Guenender, and B. Rochwerger,
2009, Virtual Network Services
For Federated Cloud Computing, IBM Research Report H-0269, http://domino.
watson.ibm.com/library/cyberdig.nsf/papers/3ADF4AD46CBB0E6B852576770056
B848
9.
A. Landau, D. Hadas and M. Ben-Yehuda, 2010, Plugging the hypervisor abstrac-
tion leaks caused by virtual networking, SYSTOR ‘10: Proceedings of the 3rd
Annual Haifa Experimental Systems Conference, pp. 19, http://doi.acm.org/
10.1145/1815695.1815716
REFERENCES
411


CHAPTER 16
SLA MANAGEMENT IN CLOUD
COMPUTING: A SERVICE PROVIDER’S
PERSPECTIVE
SUMIT BOSE, ANJANEYULU PASALA, DHEEPAK RAMANUJAM A,
SRIDHAR MURTHY and GANESAN MALAIYANDISAMY
16.1
INSPIRATION
In the early days of web-application deployment, performance of the applica-
tion at peak load was a single important criterion for provisioning server
resources [1]. Provisioning in those days involved deciding hardware conﬁg-
uration, determining the number of physical machines, and acquiring them
upfront so that the overall business objectives could be achieved. The web
applications were hosted on these dedicated individual servers within enter-
prises’ own server rooms. These web applications were used to provide different
kinds of e-services to various clients. Typically, the service-level objectives
(SLOs) for these applications were response time and throughput of the
application end-user requests. The capacity buildup was to cater to the
estimated peak load experienced by the application. The activity of determining
the number of servers and their capacity that could satisfactorily serve the
application end-user requests at peak loads is called capacity planning [1].
An example scenario where two web applications, application A and
application B, are hosted on a separate set of dedicated servers within the
enterprise-owned server rooms is shown in Figure 16.1. The planned capacity
for each of the applications to run successfully is three servers. As the number
of web applications grew, the server rooms in the organization became large
and such server rooms were known as data centers. These data centers were
owned and managed by the enterprises themselves.
Cloud Computing: Principles and Paradigms,
Edited by Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg and
Andrzej Goscinski
Copyright r 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
413


Furthermore, over the course of time, the number of web applications and
their complexity have grown. Therefore, the complexity of managing the data
centers also increased. Accordingly, enterprises realized that it was economical
to outsource the application hosting activity to third-party infrastructure
providers because:
 The enterprises need not invest in procuring expensive hardware upfront
without knowing the viability of the business.
 The hardware and application maintenance were non-core activities of
their business.
 As the number of web applications grew, the level of sophistication
required to manage the data centers increased manyfold—hence the cost
of maintaining them.
Enterprises developed the web applications and deployed on the infrastruc-
ture of the third-party service providers. These providers get the required
User
Enterprise Data Centre  – Geographically Locked
(Managed by Enterprise IT)
Application I
Application III
Application II
Enterprise Data Centre II
Application I
Application III
Application II
Enterprise Data Centre I
Application Service
Request 
Response with certain
response time => SLO
Response with certain
response time => SLO
Application Service
Request 
User
FIGURE 16.1. Hosting of applications on servers within enterprise’s data centers.
414
SLA MANAGEMENT IN CLOUD COMPUTING: A SERVICE PROVIDER’S PERSPECTIVE


hardware and make it available for application hosting. It necessitated the
enterprises to enter into a legal agreement with the infrastructure service
providers to guarantee a minimum quality of service (QoS). Typically, the
QoS parameters are related to the availability of the system CPU, data storage,
and network for efﬁcient execution of the application at peak loads. This legal
agreement is known as the service-level agreement (SLA). For example, one
SLA may state that the application’s server machine will be available for 99.9%
of the key business hours of the application’s end users, also called core time,
and 85% of the non-core time. Another SLA may state that the service provider
would respond to a reported issue in less than 10 minutes during the core time,
but would respond in one hour during non-core time. These SLAs are known
as the infrastructure SLAs, and the infrastructure service providers are
known as Application Service Providers (ASPs). This scenario is depicted in
Figure 16.2, where the enterprise applications are hosted on the dedicated
servers belonging to an ASP. Consequently, a set of tools for monitoring and
measurement of availability of the infrastructure were required and developed.
However, availability of the infrastructure doesn’t automatically guarantee the
availability of the application for its end users. These tools helped in tracking
the SLA adherence. The responsibility for making the application available to
its end users is with the enterprises. Therefore, the enterprises’ IT team
performs capacity planning, and the infrastructure provider procures the same.
The dedicated hosting practice resulted in massive redundancies within the
ASP’s data centers due to the underutilization of many of their servers. This is
because the applications were not fully utilizing their servers’ capacity at non-
peak loads. To reduce the redundancies and increase the server utilization in
data centers, ASPs started co-hosting applications with complementary work-
load patterns. Co-hosting of applications means deploying more than one
application on a single server. This led to further cost advantage for both the
ASPs and enterprises. Figure 16.3 shows the enterprise and the third-party
perspective before and after the applications are co-located. Figure 16.3a and
Figure 16.3c shows the underutilized capacity of a server during dedicated
hosting. However, Figure 16.3b shows the scenario when the same system is
multiplexed between two applications, application A and application B; and
the capacity of the server visible to the enterprise owning application A is only
the amount consumed by it. However, Figure 16.3d depicts the ASP’s
perspective of the server capacity utilization when two applications, application
A and application B, having complementary workload patterns are co-located.
However, newer challenges such as application performance isolation and
security guarantees have emerged and needed to be addressed. Performance
isolation implies that one application should not steal the resources being
utilized by other co-located applications. For example, assume that application
A is required to use more quantity of a resource than originally allocated to it for
duration of time t. For that duration the amount of the same resource available
to application B is decreased. This could adversely affect the performance of
application B. Similarly, one application should not access and destroy the data
16.1
INSPIRATION
415


Check for Infrastructure
Availability? 
User
User
Enterprise I
Applications
Enterprise III
Applications
Enterprise II
Applications
Application Service Provider(ASP)
Application Service
Request 
Response with certain
response time => SLO
Service-Level Agreement 
Enterprise
FIGURE 16.2. Dedicated hosting of applications in third party data centers.
416


and other information of co-located applications. Hence, appropriate measures
are needed to guarantee security and performance isolation. These challenges
prevented ASPs from fully realizing the beneﬁts of co-hosting.
Virtualization technologies have been proposed to overcome the above
challenges. The ASPs could exploit the containerization features of virtualiza-
tion technologies to provide performance isolation and guarantee data security
to different co-hosted applications [2, 3]. The applications, instead of being
hosted on the physical machines, can be encapsulated using virtual machines.
Thesevirtualmachinesarethenmappedtothephysicalmachines.Systemresource
allocation to these virtual machines can be made in two modes: (1) conserving
and (2) nonconserving. In the conserving mode, a virtual machine demanding
more system resources (CPU and memory) than the speciﬁed quota cannot be
allocated the spare resources that are remain un-utilized by the other co-hosted
virtual machines. In the nonconserving mode the spare resources that are
not utilized by the co-hosted virtual machines can be used by the virtual
machine needing the extra amount of resource. If the resource requirements of
a virtual machine cannot be fulﬁlled from the current physical host, then the
virtual machine can be migrated to another physical machine capable of
fulﬁlling the additional resource requirements. This new development enabled
Capacity
Resource usage (App-A)
Time
Resource
Capacity
Resource usage (App-A)
Time
Resource
Capacity
Resource usage (App-A)
Time
Resource
Capacity
Resource usage (App-A)
Time
Resource
Resource usage (App-B)
(b) 
(a) 
(d) 
(c) 
FIGURE 16.3. Service consumer and service provider perspective before and after the
MSP’s hosting platforms are virtualized and cloud-enabled. (a) Service consumer
perspective earlier. (b) Service consumer perspective now. (c) Service provider perspec-
tive earlier. (d) Service provider perspective now.
16.1
INSPIRATION
417


the ASPs to allocate system resources to different competing applications on
demand. Because, the system resources are allocated to the applications based
on their needs at different times, the notion of capacity planning is redundant.
This is because the enterprises and the ASPs need not provision their resources
for the peak load.
Adoption of virtualization technologies required ASPs to get more detailed
insight into the application runtime characteristics with high accuracy. Based
on these characteristics, ASPs can allocate system resources more efﬁciently to
these applications on-demand, so that application-level metrics can be mon-
itored and met effectively. These metrics are request rates and response times.
Therefore, different SLAs than the infrastructure SLAs are required. These
SLAs are called application SLAs. These service providers are known as
Managed Service Providers (MSP) because the service providers were respon-
sible for managing the application availability too. This scenario is shown in
Figure 16.4, where both application A and application B share the same set of
virtualized servers.
To fulﬁll the SLOs mentioned in the application SLA and also make their IT
infrastructure elastic, an in-depth understanding of the application’s behavior
is required for the MSPs. Elasticity implies progressively scaling up the IT
infrastructure to take the increasing load of an application. The customer is
billed based on their application usage of infrastructure resources for a given
period only. The infrastructure can be augmented by procuring resources
dynamically from multiple sources, including other MSPs, if resources are
scarce at their data centers. This kind of new hosting infrastructure is called
cloud platform. The cloud platforms introduce another set of challenges to
fulﬁll the SLOs agreed between the cloud owners and the application owners.
Due to nonavailability of high-level design documents, the cloud owners have
to treat the customer application that might include many third-party compo-
nents and packaged applications, as a black box. To address these challenges in
meeting SLAs, service providers are required to follow a meticulous process for
understanding and characterizing the applications runtime behavior better.
16.2
TRADITIONAL APPROACHES TO SLO MANAGEMENT
Traditionally, load balancing techniques and admission control mechanisms
have been used to provide guaranteed quality of service (QoS) for hosted web
applications. These mechanisms can be viewed as the ﬁrst attempt towards
managing the SLOs. In the following subsections we discuss the existing
approaches for load balancing and admission control for ensuring QoS.
16.2.1
Load Balancing
The objective of a load balancing is to distribute the incoming requests onto a
set of physical machines, each hosting a replica of an application, so that the
418
SLA MANAGEMENT IN CLOUD COMPUTING: A SERVICE PROVIDER’S PERSPECTIVE


Check for Infrastructure
Availability? 
User
User
Enterprise-I
App
Enterprise-N
App
Application Service Provider(ASP)
Response with certain
response time => SLO
Service Level Agreement
Application Service
Request 
Virtualized
Server-I
Enterprise-I
App
Enterprise-N
App
Virtualized
Server-N
Enterprise
FIGURE 16.4. Shared hosting of applications on virtualized servers within ASP’s data centers.
419


load on the machines is equally distributed [4]. The load balancing algorithm
executes on a physical machine that interfaces with the clients. This physical
machine, also called the front-end node, receives the incoming requests and
distributes these requests to different physical machines for further execution.
This set of physical machines is responsible for serving the incoming requests
and are known as the back-end nodes. Typically, the algorithm executing on
the front-end node is agnostic to the nature of the request. This means that the
front-end node is neither aware of the type of client from which the request
originates nor aware of the category (e.g., browsing, selling, payment, etc.) to
which the request belongs to. This category of load balancing algorithms is
known as class-agnostic. There is a second category of load balancing
algorithms that is known as class-aware. With class-aware load balancing
and requests distribution, the front-end node must additionally inspect the type
of client making the request and/or the type of service requested before deciding
which back-end node should service the request. Inspecting a request to ﬁnd
out the class or category of a request is difﬁcult because the client must ﬁrst
establish a connection with a node (front-end node) that is not responsible for
servicing the request. Figure 16.5 shows the general taxonomy of different load-
balancing algorithms.
16.2.2
Admission Control
Admission control algorithms play an important role in deciding the set of
requests that should be admitted into the application server when the server
experiences “very” heavy loads [5, 6]. During overload situations, since the
response time for all the requests would invariably degrade if all the arriving
requests are admitted into the server, it would be preferable to be selective in
identifying a subset of requests that should be admitted into the system so that
the overall pay-off is high. The objective of admission control mechanisms,
therefore, is to police the incoming requests and identify a subset of incoming
requests that can be admitted into the system when the system faces overload
situations. Figure 16.6 shows the general taxonomy of the admission control
mechanisms. The algorithms proposed in the literature are broadly categorized
Load Balancing Algorithms
Class-agnostic
Class-aware
Client-aware
Content-aware
Client plus
Content aware
FIGURE 16.5. General taxonomy of load-balancing algorithms.
420
SLA MANAGEMENT IN CLOUD COMPUTING: A SERVICE PROVIDER’S PERSPECTIVE


into two types: (1) request-based algorithms and (2) session-based algorithms.
Request-based admission control algorithms reject new requests if the servers
are running to their capacity. The disadvantage with this approach is that a
client’s session may consist of multiple requests that are not necessarily
unrelated. Consequently, some requests are rejected even if there are others
that are honored. Contrary to request-based algorithms, session-based admis-
sion control mechanisms try to ensure that longer sessions are completed and
any new sessions are rejected. Accordingly, once a session is admitted into the
server, all future requests belonging to that session are admitted as well, even
though new sessions are rejected by the system. Furthermore, the decision to
reject a request can depend on the type of user making the request or the nature
of the request being made. For example, a new request or a new session
initiated by a high-priority user may be admitted while the requests from low-
priority users are rejected. Similarly, requests that are likely to consume more
system resources can be rejected during overload situations. Such admission
control mechanisms are called QoS-aware control mechanisms.
16.3
TYPES OF SLA
Service-level agreement provides a framework within which both seller and
buyer of a service can pursue a proﬁtable service business relationship. It
outlines the broad understanding between the service provider and the service
consumer for conducting business and forms the basis for maintaining a
mutually beneﬁcial relationship. From a legal perspective, the necessary terms
and conditions that bind the service provider to provide services continually to
the service consumer are formally deﬁned in SLA.
SLA can be modeled using web service-level agreement (WSLA) language
speciﬁcation [7]. Although WSLA is intended for web-service-based applica-
tions, it is equally applicable for hosting of applications. Service-level para-
meter, metric, function, measurement directive, service-level objective, and
penalty are some of the important components of WSLA and are described in
Table 16.1.
Admission Control Mechanisms
Request Based
Session Based
QoS Agnostic
(Plain Vanilla)
QoS Aware
(Class Based)
FIGURE 16.6. General taxonomy for admission control mechanisms.
16.3
TYPES OF SLA
421


There are two types of SLAs from the perspective of application hosting. These
are described in detail here.
Infrastructure SLA. The infrastructure provider manages and offers guaran-
tees on availability of the infrastructure, namely, server machine, power,
network connectivity, and so on. Enterprises manage themselves, their applica-
tions that are deployed on these server machines. The machines are leased to
the customers and are isolated from machines of other customers. In such
dedicated hosting environments, a practical example of service-level guarantees
offered by infrastructure providers is shown in Table 16.2.
Application SLA. In the application co-location hosting model, the server
capacity is available to the applications based solely on their resource demands.
Hence, the service providers are ﬂexible in allocating and de-allocating
computing resources among the co-located applications. Therefore, the service
TABLE 16.1. Key Components of a Service-Level Agreement
Service-Level
Parameter
Describes an observable property of a service whose value is
measurable.
Metrics
These are deﬁnitions of values of service properties that are
measured from a service-providing system or computed from other
metrics and constants. Metrics are the key instrument to describe
exactly what SLA parameters mean by specifying how to measure or
compute the parameter values.
Function
A function speciﬁes how to compute a metric’s value from the values
of other metrics and constants. Functions are central to describing
exactly how SLA parameters are computed from resource metrics.
Measurement
directives
These specify how to measure a metric.
TABLE 16.2. Key Contractual Elements of an Infrastructural SLA
Hardware availability
 99% uptime in a calendar month
Power availability
 99.99% of the time in a calendar month
Data center network
availability
 99.99% of the time in a calendar month
Backbone network
availability
 99.999% of the time in a calendar month
Service credit for
unavailability
 Refund of service credit prorated on downtime period
Outage notiﬁcation
guarantee
 Notiﬁcation of customer within 1 hr of complete downtime
Internet latency
guarantee
 When latency is measured at 5-min intervals to an upstream
provider, the average doesn’t exceed 60 msec
Packet loss guarantee
 Shall not exceed 1% in a calendar month
422
SLA MANAGEMENT IN CLOUD COMPUTING: A SERVICE PROVIDER’S PERSPECTIVE


providers are also responsible for ensuring to meet their customer’s application
SLOs. For example, an enterprise can have the following application SLA with
a service provider for one of its application, as shown in Table 16.3.
It is also possible for a customer and the service provider to mutually agree
upon a set of SLAs with different performance and cost structure rather than a
single SLA. The customer has the ﬂexibility to choose any of the agreed SLAs
from the available offerings. At runtime, the customer can switch between the
different SLAs.
However, from the SLA perspective there are multiple challenges for
provisioning the infrastructure on demand. These challenges are as follows:
a. The application is a black box to the MSP and the MSP has virtually no
knowledge about the application runtime characteristics. Therefore, the
MSP needs to determine the right amount of computing resources
required
for
different
components
of
an application
at
various
workloads.
b. The MSP needs to understand the performance bottlenecks and the
scalability of the application.
c. The MSP analyzes the application before it goes on-live. However,
subsequent operations/enhancements by the customer’s to their applica-
tions or auto updates beside others can impact the performance of the
applications, thereby making the application SLA at risk.
d. The risk of capacity planning is with the service provider instead of the
customer. If every customer decides to select the highest grade of SLA
simultaneously, there may not be a sufﬁcient number of servers for
provisioning and meeting the SLA obligations of all the customers.
TABLE 16.3. Key contractual components of an application SLA
Service-level
parameter metric
 Web site response time (e.g., max of 3.5 sec per user request)
 Latency of web server (WS) (e.g., max of 0.2 sec per request)
 Latency of DB (e.g., max of 0.5 sec per query)
Function
 Average latency of WS = (latency of web server 1 + latency of
web server 2 ) /2
 Web site response time = Average latency of web server +
latency of database
Measurement
directive
 DB latency available via http://mgmtserver/em/latency
 WS latency available via http://mgmtserver/ws/instanceno/
latency
Service-level
objective
 Service assurance
 web site latency , 1 sec when concurrent connection , 1000
Penalty
 1000 USD for every minute while the SLO was breached
16.3
TYPES OF SLA
423


16.4
LIFE CYCLE OF SLA
Each SLA goes through a sequence of steps starting from identiﬁcation of
terms and conditions, activation and monitoring of the stated terms and
conditions, and eventual termination of contract once the hosting relationship
ceases to exist. Such a sequence of steps is called SLA life cycle and consists of
the following ﬁve phases:
1. Contract deﬁnition
2. Publishing and discovery
3. Negotiation
4. Operationalization
5. De-commissioning
Here, we explain in detail each of these phases of SLA life cycle.
Contract Deﬁnition. Generally, service providers deﬁne a set of service
offerings and corresponding SLAs using standard templates. These service
offerings form a catalog. Individual SLAs for enterprises can be derived by
customizing these base SLA templates.
Publication and Discovery. Service provider advertises these base service
offerings through standard publication media, and the customers should be
able to locate the service provider by searching the catalog. The customers can
search different competitive offerings and shortlist a few that fulﬁll their
requirements for further negotiation.
Negotiation. Once the customer has discovered a service provider who can
meet their application hosting need, the SLA terms and conditions needs to be
mutually agreed upon before signing the agreement for hosting the application.
For a standard packaged application which is offered as service, this phase
could be automated. For customized applications that are hosted on cloud
platforms, this phase is manual. The service provider needs to analyze the
application’s behavior with respect to scalability and performance before
agreeing on the speciﬁcation of SLA. At the end of this phase, the SLA is
mutually agreed by both customer and provider and is eventually signed off.
SLA negotiation can utilize the WS-negotiation speciﬁcation [8].
Operationalization. SLA operation consists of SLA monitoring, SLA ac-
counting, and SLA enforcement. SLA monitoring involves measuring parameter
values and calculating the metrics deﬁned as a part of SLA and determining the
deviations. On identifying the deviations, the concerned parties are notiﬁed. SLA
accounting involves capturing and archiving the SLA adherence for compliance.
As part of accounting, the application’s actual performance and the performance
424
SLA MANAGEMENT IN CLOUD COMPUTING: A SERVICE PROVIDER’S PERSPECTIVE


guaranteed as a part of SLA is reported. Apart from the frequency and the
duration of the SLA breach, it should also provide the penalties paid for each
SLA violation. SLA enforcement involves taking appropriate action when the
runtime monitoring detects a SLA violation. Such actions could be notifying the
concerned parties, charging the penalties besides other things. The different
policies can be expressed using a subset of the Common Information Model
(CIM) [9]. The CIM model is an open standard that allows expressing managed
elements of data center via relationships and common objects.
De-commissioning. SLA decommissioning involves termination of all activ-
ities performed under a particular SLA when the hosting relationship between
the service provider and the service consumer has ended. SLA speciﬁes the
terms and conditions of contract termination and speciﬁes situations under
which the relationship between a service provider and a service consumer can
be considered to be legally ended.
16.5
SLA MANAGEMENT IN CLOUD
SLA management of applications hosted on cloud platforms involves ﬁve
phases.
1. Feasibility
2. On-boarding
3. Pre-production
4. Production
5. Termination
Different activities performed under each of these phases are shown in Figure 16.7.
These activities are explained in detail in the following subsections.
16.5.1
Feasibility Analysis
MSP conducts the feasibility study of hosting an application on their cloud
platforms. This study involves three kinds of feasibility: (1) technical feasibility,
(2) infrastructure feasibility, and (3) ﬁnancial feasibility. The technical feasi-
bility of an application implies determining the following:
1. Ability of an application to scale out.
2. Compatibility of the application with the cloud platform being used
within the MSP’s data center.
3. The need and availability of a speciﬁc hardware and software required for
hosting and running of the application.
4. Preliminary information about the application performance and whether
they can be met by the MSP.
16.5
SLA MANAGEMENT IN CLOUD
425


Obtain customer app
Feasibility Analysis
Onboarding
Pre-Production
Production
Cease
Application Lifecycle through Service Provider Platform
Package application
Decline application
Perform Technical
feasibility
Perform financial
feasibility
Performance analysis
Estimate cost for each
SLA
Identify possible SLAs
SLA acceptable to
customer?
Cost is acceptable to
customer?
Create/recreate policies (BP/
OP/PP) for each of the SLA
Validated policies wrt to
SLAs
Stage the app to pre-prod env
Customer validation of app
against SLA
Stage the app to prod env and
made live
Repeated SLA
violation?
SLA violation?
Customer request for new/
modification of SLA
Rollback the app from prod env
Transfer files to customer
Application cease
Choose different SLA?
FIGURE 16.7. Flowchart of the SLA management in cloud.
426
SLA MANAGEMENT IN CLOUD COMPUTING: A SERVICE PROVIDER’S PERSPECTIVE


Performing the infrastructure feasibility involves determining the availability of
infrastructural resources in sufﬁcient quantity so that the projected demands
of the application can be met. The ﬁnancial feasibility study involves determining
the approximate cost to be incurred by the MSP and the price the MSP
charges the customer so that the hosting activity is proﬁtable to both of them.
A feasibility report consists of the results of the above three feasibility studies.
The report forms the basis for further communication with the customer. Once
the provider and customer agree upon the ﬁndings of the report, the outsourcing
of the application hosting activity proceeds to the next phase, called “on-
boarding” of application. Only the basic feasibility of hosting an application
has been carried in this phase. However, the detailed runtime characteristics of
the application are studied as part of the on-boarding activity.
16.5.2
On-Boarding of Application
Once the customer and the MSP agree in principle to host the application based
on the ﬁndings of the feasibility study, the application is moved from the
customer servers to the hosting platform. Moving an application to the MSP’s
hosting platform is called on-boarding [10]. As part of the on-boarding activity,
the MSP understands the application runtime characteristics using runtime
proﬁlers. This helps the MSP to identify the possible SLAs that can be offered
to the customer for that application. This also helps in creation of the necessary
policies (also called rule sets) required to guarantee the SLOs mentioned in the
application SLA. The application is accessible to its end users only after the on-
boarding activity is completed.
On-boarding activity consists of the following steps:
a. Packing of the application for deploying on physical or virtual environ-
ments. Application packaging is the process of creating deployable
components on the hosting platform (could be physical or virtual).
Open Virtualization Format (OVF) standard is used for packaging the
application for cloud platform [11].
b. The packaged application is executed directly on the physical servers to
capture and analyze the application performance characteristics. It allows
the functional validation of customer’s application. Besides, it provides a
baseline performance value for the application in nonvirtual environment.
This can be used as one of the data points for customer’s performance
expectation and for application SLA. Additionally, it helps to identify the
nature of application—that is, whether it is CPU-intensive or I/O-
intensive or network-intensive and the potential performance bottlenecks.
c. The application is executed on a virtualized platform and the application
performance characteristics are noted again. Important performance
characteristics like the application’s ability to scale (out and up) and
performance bounds (minimum and maximum performance) are noted.
16.5
SLA MANAGEMENT IN CLOUD
427


d. Based on the measured performance characteristics, different possible
SLAs are identiﬁed. The resources required and the costs involved for
each SLA are also computed.
e. Once the customer agrees to the set of SLOs and the cost, the MSP starts
creating different policies required by the data center for automated
management of the application. This implies that the management system
should automatically infer the amount of system resources that should be
allocated/de-allocated to/from appropriate components of the application
when the load on the system increases/decreases. These policies are of three
types: (1) business, (2) operational, and (3) provisioning. Business policies
help prioritize access to the resources in case of contentions. Business
policies are in the form of weights for different customers or group of
customers. Operational policies are the actions to be taken when different
thresholds/conditions are reached. Also, the actions when thresholds/
conditions/triggers on service-level parameters are breached or about to
be breached are deﬁned. The corrective action could be different types of
provisioningsuchasscale-up,scale-down,scale-out,scale-in,andsoon,ofa
particular tier of an application. Additionally, notiﬁcation and logging
action (notify the enterprise application’s administrator, etc.) are also
deﬁned. Operational policies (OP) are represented in the following format:
OP 5 collection of hCondition, Actioni
Here the action could be workﬂow deﬁning the sequence of actions to be
undertaken. For example, one OP is
OP 5 haverage latency of web server . 0.8 sec, scale-out the web-server tieri
It means, if average latency of the web server is more than 0.8 sec then
automatically scale out the web-server tier. On reaching this threshold, MSP
should increase the number of instances of the web server.
Provisioning policies help in deﬁning a sequence of actions corresponding to
external inputs or user requests. Scale-out, scale-in, start, stop, suspend, resume
are some of the examples of provisioning actions. A provisioning policy (PP) is
represented as
PP 5 collection of hRequest, Actioni
For example, a provisioning policy to start a web site consists of the following
sequence: start database server, start web-server instance 1, followed by start the
web-server instance 2, and so on. On deﬁning these policies, the packaged
applications are deployed on the cloud platform and the application is tested to
validate whether the policies are able to meet the SLA requirements. This step is
iterative and is repeated until all the infrastructure conditions necessary to satisfy
the application SLA are identiﬁed.
Once the different infrastructure policies needed to guarantee the SLOs
mentioned in the SLA are completely captured, the on-boarding activity is said
to be completed.
428
SLA MANAGEMENT IN CLOUD COMPUTING: A SERVICE PROVIDER’S PERSPECTIVE


16.5.3
Preproduction
Once the determination of policies is completed as discussed in previous phase,
the application is hosted in a simulated production environment. It facilitates
the customer to verify and validate the MSP’s ﬁndings on application’s runtime
characteristics and agree on the deﬁned SLA. Once both parties agree on the
cost and the terms and conditions of the SLA, the customer sign-off is
obtained. On successful completion of this phase the MSP allows the applica-
tion to go on-live.
16.5.4
Production
In this phase, the application is made accessible to its end users under the
agreed SLA. However, there could be situations when the managed
application tends to behave differently in a production environment com-
pared to the preproduction environment. This in turn may cause sustained
breach of the terms and conditions mentioned in the SLA. Additionally,
customer may request the MSP for inclusion of new terms and conditions in
the SLA. If the application SLA is breached frequently or if the customer
requests for a new non-agreed SLA, the on-boarding process is performed
again. In the case of the former, on-boarding activity is repeated to analyze
the application and its policies with respect to SLA fulﬁllment. In case of the
latter, a new set of policies are formulated to meet the fresh terms and
conditions of the SLA.
16.5.5
Termination
When the customer wishes to withdraw the hosted application and does not
wish to continue to avail the services of the MSP for managing the hosting of its
application, the termination activity is initiated. On initiation of termination,
all data related to the application are transferred to the customer and only the
essential information is retained for legal compliance. This ends the hosting
relationship between the two parties for that application, and the customer
sign-off is obtained.
16.6
AUTOMATED POLICY-BASED MANAGEMENT
This section explains in detail the operationalization of the “Operational” and
“Provisioning” policies deﬁned as part of the on-boarding activity. The policies
specify the sequence of actions to be performed under different circumstances.
Operational policies specify the functional relationship between the system-
level infrastructural attributes and the business level SLA goals. Knowledge of
such a relationship helps in identifying the quantum of system resources to be
allocated to the various components of the application for different system
16.6
AUTOMATED POLICY-BASED MANAGEMENT
429


attributes at various workloads, workload compositions, and operating condi-
tions, so that the SLA goals are met. Figure 16.8 explains the importance of
such a relationship. For example, consider a three-tier web application
consisting of web server, application server, and database server. Each of the
servers is encapsulated using a virtual machine and is hosted on virtualized
servers. Furthermore, assume that the web tier and the database tier of the
application have been provisioned with sufﬁcient resources at a particular
work-load. The effect of varying the system resources (such as CPU) on the
SLO, which in this case is the average response time for customer requests, is
shown in Figure 16.8.
To understand the system resource requirements for each of the tiers of an
application at different workloads necessitates the deployment of the applica-
tion on a test system. The test system is used to collect the low-level system
metrics such as usage of memory and CPU at different workloads, as well as to
observe the corresponding high-level service level objectives such as average
response time. The metrics thus collected are used to derive the functional
relationship between the SLOs and low-level system attributes. These func-
tional relations are called policies. For example, a classiﬁcation technique is
used to derive policies [12, 13].
The triggering of operational and provisional policies results in a set of actions
to be executed by the service provider platform. It is possible that some of these
actions contend for the same resources. In such a case, execution of certain
actions needs to be prioritized over the execution of others. The rules that govern
this prioritization of request execution in case of resource contention are speciﬁed
Average Response Time (sec)
Percentage of CPU assigned to Application Server
20
50
90
5
10
15
20
SLO
FIGURE 16.8. Performance of a multi-tier application for varied CPU allocation.
430
SLA MANAGEMENT IN CLOUD COMPUTING: A SERVICE PROVIDER’S PERSPECTIVE


as a part of business policy. Some of the parameters often used to prioritize action
and perform resource contention resolution are:
 The SLA class (Platinum, Gold, Silver, etc.) to which the application
belongs to.
 The amount of penalty associated with SLA breach.
 Whether the application is at the threshold of breaching the SLA.
 Whether the application has already breached the SLA.
 The number of applications belonging to the same customer that has
breached SLA.
 The number of applications belonging to the same customer about to
breach SLA.
 The type of action to be performed to rectify the situation.
Priority ranking algorithms use these parameters to derive scores. These
scores are used to rank each of the actions that contend for the same resources.
Actions having high scores get higher priority and hence, receive access to the
contended resources.
Furthermore, automatic operationalization of these policies consists of a set
of components as shown in
Figure 16.9. The basic functionality of these
components is described below:
1. Prioritization Engine. Requests from different customers’ web applica-
tions contending for the same resource are identiﬁed, and accordingly
their execution is prioritized. Business policies deﬁned by the MSP helps
in identifying the requests whose execution should be prioritized in case
of resource contentions so that the MSP can realize higher beneﬁts.
2. Provisioning Engine. Every user request of an application will be enacted
by the system. The set of steps necessary to enact the user requests are
deﬁned in the provisioning policy, and they are used to fulﬁll the
application request like starting an application, stopping an application,
and so on. These set of steps can be visualized as a workﬂow. Hence, the
execution of provisioning policy requires a workﬂow engine [14].
3. Rules Engine. The operation policy deﬁnes a sequence of actions to be
enacted under different conditions/trigger points. The rules engine
evaluates the data captured by the monitoring system [15], evaluates
against the predeﬁned operation rules, and triggers the associated action
if required. Rules engine and the operational policy is the key to
guaranteeing SLA under a self healing system.
4. Monitoring System. Monitoring system collects the deﬁned metrics in
SLA. These metrics are used for monitoring resource failures, evaluating
operational policies, and auditing and billing purpose.
5. Auditing. The adherence to the predeﬁned SLA needs to be monitored
and recorded. It is essential to monitor the compliance of SLA because
16.6
AUTOMATED POLICY-BASED MANAGEMENT
431
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>


any noncompliance leads to strict penalties. The audit report forms the
basis for strategizing and long-term planning for the MSP.
6. Accounting/Billing System. Based on the payment model, chargebacks
could be made based on the resource utilized by the process during the
operation. The ﬁxed cost and recurring costs are computed and billed
accordingly.
The interactions among these components are shown in Figure 16.9 and
described below.
The policies and packaged application are deployed on the platform after
completing the on-boarding activity. The customer is provided with options
to start the application in any of the agreed SLAs. The application request is sent
via the access layer to the system. Using the provisioning policy, the provisioning
engine determines how and in what sequence the different components/tiers of an
application should be started and conﬁgured. If the start operation requires a
resource that is also contended by a different application request, then provision-
ing engine interacts with the prioritization engine to determine the request that
«subsystem»
Customer Access Layer
«subsystem»
Access Layer
«subsystem»
Rules Engine
«subsystem»
Monitoring System
«subsystem»
Auditing
«subsystem»
Accounting/Billing
System
«subsystem»
Authentication and
Authorization
«subsystem»
Prioritization
Engine
«subsystem»
VM Provisioning
«subsystem»
Storage Manager
«subsystem»
Data Center
«subsystem»
NW Manager
«subsystem»
Provisioning
Engine
«subsystem»
Bare Metal
Provisioning
«subsystem»
System Administrator
Dashboard
FIGURE 16.9. Component diagram of policy-based automated management system.
432
SLA MANAGEMENT IN CLOUD COMPUTING: A SERVICE PROVIDER’S PERSPECTIVE


should have access to the contended resource in case of conﬂict. This conﬂict
resolution is guided by the business policy deﬁned in the prioritization engine.
Once an application begins execution, it is continuously monitored by the
monitoring system. Monitoring involves collecting statistics about the key
metrics and evaluating them against the rules deﬁned in the operational policy
for validating the SLA adherence. SLA violation triggers rules that initiate
appropriate corrective action automatically. For example, whenever the perfor-
mance of the application degrades and chances of violating the agreed SLO limits
are high, the rules that help scale out the bottleneck tier of the application is
triggered. This ensures that the performance does not degenerate to a level of
violating the SLA. Periodically, the amount of resource utilized by the applica-
tion is calculated. On calculating the resource utilization, the cost is computed
correspondingly and the bill is generated. The bill along with the report on the
performance of the application is sent to the customer.
Alternatively, the monitoring system can interact with the rules engine
through an optimization engine, as shown in Figure 16.10. The role of the
optimization system is to decide the migration strategy that helps optimize
certain objective functions for virtual machine migration. The objective could
be to minimize the number of virtual machines migrated or minimize the
number of physical machines affected by the migration process. The following
example highlights the importance of the optimization engine within a policy
based management system [16].
Assume an initial assignment of seven virtual machines (VM) to the three
physical machines (PM) at time t1 as shown in Figure 16.11. Also, each of the
three PMs has memory and CPU capacity of 100. At time t1, the CPU usage by
VM1, VM2, and VM3 on PMA are 40, 40, and 20, respectively, and the memory
Monitoring
System
Optimization
Engine
Provisioning
Engine
Rules
Engine
App1
VMM
VMM
VMM
VMM
VM0 VM1
VM0
VM0 VM1
VM0 VM1
App2
App1
App2
App1
App2
App1
PM0
PM1
PM3
Policy-Based System
FIGURE 16.10. Importance of optimization in the policy-based management system.
16.6
AUTOMATED POLICY-BASED MANAGEMENT
433


consumption is 20, 10, and 40 respectively. Similarly, at time t1 the CPU and
memory requirements of VM4, VM5, and VM6 on PMB are 20, 10, 40 and 20,
40, 20, respectively. VM7 only consumes 20% of CPU and 20% of memory on
PMC. Thus, PMB and PMC are underloaded but PMA is overloaded. Assume
VM1 is the cause of the overload situation in PMA.
CPU
Mem
1
40
20
2
40
10
3
20
40
A
4
20
20
5
10
40
6
40
20
B
7
20
20
C
CPU
Mem
2
40
10
3
20
40
A
4
20
20
5
10
40
6
40
20
B
7
20
20
1
40
20
C
CPU
Mem
2
40
10
3
20
40
A
5
10
40
6
40
20
B
7
20
20
1
40
20
4
20
40
C
CPU
Mem
1
40
20
2
40
10
3
20
40
A
4
20
20
5
10
40
6
40
20
B
7
20
20
C
CPU
Mem
2
40
10
3
20
40
A
4
20
20
5
10
40
6
40
20
B
7
20
20
1
40
20
C
FIGURE 16.11. (a) Initial conﬁguration of the VMs and the PMs at time t1. (b)
Conﬁguration resulting from event-based migration of VM1 at time t1. (c) Resource
requirement situation at time t2 . t1. (d) Conﬁguration resulting from “event-based”
migration of VM4 at time t2 . t1. (e) Alternate conﬁguration resulting from optimiza-
tion-based migration at time t2 . t1.
434
SLA MANAGEMENT IN CLOUD COMPUTING: A SERVICE PROVIDER’S PERSPECTIVE


In the above scenario, event-based migration will result in migration of
VM1 out of PMA to PMC. Furthermore, consider that at time t2 (t2 . t1),
PMB is overloaded as the memory requirement of VM4 increases to 40.
Consequently, an event-based scheme results in migration of VM4 to PMC. At
time t3 (t3 . t2), a new VM, VM8, with CPU and memory requirements of 70
each, needs to be allocated to one of the PMs; then a new PM, PMD, needs to
be switched on for hosting it. In such a scenario, VM8 cannot be hosted on any
of the three existing PMs: PMA, PMB, and PMC. However, assume that the
duration of the time window t2 - t1 is such that the QoS and SLA violations due
to the continued hosting of VM1 on PMA are well within the permissible limits.
In such a case, the migration of both VMs—VM1 to PMB and VM4 to PMA—
at time t2 ensures lesser number of PM are switched on. This results in a global
resource assignment that may be better than local resource management.
In such environment, consider a case wherein a virtual machine is over-
loaded. The optimization module needs to not only determine the virtual
machine that needs to be migrated out of its current physical machine but also
determine the new physical machine where the migrating virtual machine
should be hosted. The Sandpiper technique [17] has been proposed for
monitoring and detecting hotspots, determining new assignments of virtual
resources to physical resources, and initiating the necessary migrations.
16.7
CONCLUSION
The chapter presented a detailed overview of SLA and its importance from the
service provider’s perspective. It described a brief history of how the SLA that
evolved from a state of infrastructure availability was the prime consideration
today where complex application SLO could be included as part of it. The
chapter provided the necessary mechanisms that make it possible for a service
provider to evaluate the infrastructure needs to meet the provisions mentioned
in the SLA. A complete view of the process involved and also an overview of
the architectural stack for achieving the same are presented.
REFERENCES
1.
D. Mensce and V. Almeida, Capacity Planning for web Performance: Metrics,
Models and Methods, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1998.
2.
P. Barham, B. Dragovic, K. Fraser, S. Hand, T. Harris, A. Ho, R. Neugebauer,
I. Pratt, and A. Warﬁeld, Xen and the art of virtualization, in Proceedings of the
19th ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, New York, October
1922, 2003, pp. 164177.
3.
G. Popek and R. Goldberg, Formal requirements for virtualizable third generation
architectures, Communications of ACM, 17(7):412421, 1974.
4.
E. de Souza E. Silva, and M. Gerla, Load balancing in distributed systems with
multiple classes and site constraints, in Proceedings of the 10th International
REFERENCES
435


Symposium on Computer Performance Modeling, Measurement and Evaluation,
Paris, France, December 1921 1984, pp. 1733.
5.
J. Carlstrom and R. Rom, Application-aware admission control and scheduling in
web servers, in Proceedings of the 21st IEEE Infocom, New York, June 2327,
2002, pp. 824831.
6.
X. Chen, P. Mohapatra, and H. Chen, An admission control scheme for
predictable server response time for web accesses, in Proceedings of the 10th
International Conference on World Wide web, Hong Kong, China, May 15, 2001,
pp. 545554.
7.
Web Service Level Agreement (WSLA) Language Speciﬁcation Version 1.0,
www.research.ibm.com/wsla/WSLASpecV120030128.pdf, accessed on
April 16,
2010.
8.
Web Services Agreement Speciﬁcation (WS Agreement), http://ogsa.gridforum.org/
Public_Comment_Docs/Documents/Oct-2006/WS-AgreementSpeciﬁcationDraftFi-
nal_sp_tn_jpver_v2.pdf, accessed on April 16, 2010.
9.
Common Information Model (CIM) Standards, DMTF standard version 2.25.0,
March 2010, http://www.dmtf.org/standards/cim/cim_schema_v2250/, accessed on
April 16, 2010.
10.
S. Bose, N. Tiwari, A. Pasala, and S. Padmanabhuni, SLA Aware “on-boarding”
of applications on the cloud, SETLabs Brieﬁngs, 7(7):2732, 2009.
11.
Open Virtualization Format Speciﬁcation, DMTF standard version 1.0.0, Doc. no.
DSP0243, February 2009, http://www.dmtf.org/standards/published_documents/
DSP0243_1.0.0.pdf, accessed on April 16, 2010.
12.
Y. Udupi, A. Sahai, and S. Singhal, A classiﬁcation-based approach to policy
reﬁnement, in Proceedings of the 10th IFIP/IEEE International Symposium on
Integrated
Network
Management,
Munich,
Germany,
May
2125,
2007,
pp. 785788.
13.
Y. Chen, S. Iyer, X. Liu, D. Milojicic, and A. Sahai, SLA decomposition:
Translating service level objectives to system level thresholds, in Proceedings of
the 4th International Conference on Autonomic Computing (ICAC), Florida, June
1115, 2007, pp. 33.
14.
K. Gor, D. Ra, S. Ali, L. Alves, N. Arurkar, I. Gupta, A. Chakrabarti, A. Sharma,
and S. Sengupta, Scalable enterprise level workﬂow and infrastructure manage-
ment in a grid computing environment, in Proceedings of the 5th IEEE Interna-
tional Symposium on Cluster Computing and the Grid (CCGrid), Cardiff, UK, May
912, 2005, pp. 661667.
15.
B. Van Halle, Business Rules Applied: Building Better Systems Using Business Rules
Approach, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ, 2002.
16.
S. Bose and S. Sudarrajan, Optimizing migration of virtual machines across
datacenters, in Proceeding of the 38th International Conference on Parallel Proces-
sing (ICPP) Workshops, Vienna, Austria, September 2225 2009, pp. 306313.
17.
T. Wood, P. Shenoy, and A. Venkataramani, Black-box and Gray-box strategies
for virtual machine migration, in Proceedings of the 4th USENIX Symposium
on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI), Cambridge, MA,
April 1113, 2007, pp. 229242.
436
SLA MANAGEMENT IN CLOUD COMPUTING: A SERVICE PROVIDER’S PERSPECTIVE


CHAPTER 17
PERFORMANCE PREDICTION FOR
HPC ON CLOUDS
ROCCO AVERSA, BENIAMINO DI MARTINO, MASSIMILIANO RAK,
SALVATORE VENTICINQUE, and UMBERTO VILLANO
17.1
INTRODUCTION
High-performance computing (HPC) is one of the contexts in which the
adoption of the cloud computing paradigm is debated. Traditionally, HPC
users are accustomed to managing directly very complex parallel systems and
performing a very ﬁne-tuning of their applications on the target hardware. The
matter is to ascertain if it may be convenient to deploy such applications on a
cloud, where users “voluntarily” lose almost all control on the execution
environment, leaving the management of datacenters to the cloud owner.
In order to understand fully the implications of this issue, it is probably
necessary to take a step back and to clarify how the cloud paradigm can be
applied to HPC. As outlined in other chapters of this book, cloud computing
may be exploited at three different levels: IaaS (Infrastructure as a Service),
PaaS (Platform as a Service), and AaaS (Application as a Service). In one way
or another, all of them can be useful for HPC. However, nowadays the most
common solution is the adoption of the IaaS paradigm. IaaS lets users run
applications on fast pay-per-use machines they don’t want to buy, to manage,
or to maintain. Furthermore, the total computational power can be easily
increased (by additional charge). For the sporadic HPC user, this solution is
undoubtedly attractive: no investment in rapidly-obsolescing machines, no
power and cooling nightmares, and no system software updates.
An IaaS cloud environment hinges on a virtualization engine. Basically, this
engine provides by means of a hypervisor the illusion of multiple independent
replicas of every physical machine in the cloud. Each replica has its own address
Cloud Computing: Principles and Paradigms,
Edited by Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg and
Andrzej Goscinski
Copyright r 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
437


space, devices, and network connections and is capable of running any software
(O.S. included) that could be run on a stand-alone machine. Currently, a number
of different virtual machine (VM) environments are readily available and can be
used to provide server virtualization (VMWare [1], Xen [2],VirtualBox [3]). The
virtual engines differ in the approach used to run the host operating systems
[unmodiﬁed (fully virtualized approach) or aware of the presence of the hypervi-
sor (paravirtualized approach)] on the exploitation of hardware CPU virtualiza-
tion technologies (like Intel VT and AMD-V) and on the type of licensing (open-
source or closed-source). On the top of such virtualization engines, which
physically manage the hardware, cloud environments offer a service-oriented
interface for managing the virtual machines (create, destroy, suspend, migrate
from a physical system to another, change the amount of available memory or the
number of virtual CPUs assigned), as well as a large set of ancillary services for
managing the secure access to resources and for auditing (and billing).
At the state of the art, there exist many solutions for building up a cloud
environment. VMWare cloud OS is integrated in the VMWare virtualization
solutions. Opennebula [4, 26], Enomaly [5], and Eucalyptus [6] are open-source
software layers that provide a service-oriented interface on the top of existing
virtual engines (mainly, VMWare and Xen). Virtual workspaces [7, 16, 27], and
related projects (Nimbus, Kupa, WISPY) build up the service-oriented inter-
face for the virtual engines by exploiting a grid infrastructure (see Section 17.2
for further details).
As mentioned above, the most common solution to exploit cloud power in the
context of HPC is to get a pay-per-use infrastructure. But, unlike other cloud
users, most HPC users usually exploit parallel hardware, and so they would like
to get parallel hardware to execute their explicitly-parallel applications. They
want to receive from the cloud a (possibly high) number of powerful machines
with fast interconnect that could resemble a high-performance computing
cluster. Stated another way, they exploit the cloud as a provider of cluster-
on-demand (CoD) systems. They ask for, and obtain from the cloud, clusters
that they can conﬁgure according to their software requirements. This is possible
since these are in fact virtual clusters, whose management (even in terms of
the number of nodes and their conﬁgurations) is completely delegated to the
cloud user.
The key of the issue discussed in this chapter (the proﬁtability of cloud for
HPC) is all in the difference between a real cluster system and the virtual cluster
received from the cloud. On the one hand, a virtual cluster may be economically
convenient, is fully conﬁgurable, and requires no long-term investment. On the
other hand, it is not as fast as a physical cluster. Furthermore, understanding
the limits of the cloud interconnect is essentially impossible. After all, a cloud is
a cloud, and you cannot put your hands on its components. This is great for the
end user, but is frustrating for the advanced HPC user who wishes to identify
the real hardware its application is running on.
Another source of confusion for most users is the relationship between
clouds and grids. Cloud environments, from the HPC point of view, are a
438
PERFORMANCE PREDICTION FOR HPC ON CLOUDS


centralized resource of computational power. On the other hand, the grid
paradigm proposes a distributed approach to computational resources, “glu-
ing” together distributed datacenters to build up a computational grid,
accessible in a simple and standardized way. After all, their objective is the
same: offering computational power to ﬁnal users. But this is obtained
following two different approaches: centralized for clouds and distributed for
grids. It is easy to ﬁnd on the net many open (and often useless) discussions
comparing the two paradigms. In this chapter we will not deal further with the
problem, limiting ourselves to discuss the proﬁtability of the two paradigms in
the HPC context and to point out the possibility to integrate both of them in a
uniﬁed view.
The above-discussed issues focus on the technological state of the art of
cloud and HPC, describing the architectural solutions offered. The problem
initially raised (whether clouds may be convenient for HPC or not) can now be
translated into the question, Is the performance loss due to the adoption of the
cloud approach acceptable in the HPC context? In short, the performance
losses linked to virtualization, relatively slow networks, and cloud overheads
are the main reason for the very slow diffusion of virtualization and cloud
techniques into HPC environments. However, there are very good motivations
for the adoption of VMs in this context. As everyone involved in HPC knows,
during recent years there has been a continuous proliferation of different
operating system versions. Many applications have strict requirements for their
execution environments. Often the applications’ environment requirements are
mutually incompatible, and it is not reasonable to modify or to re-install system
software on-the-ﬂy to make applications work. Moreover, partitioning the
computing hardware into closed environments with different characteristics is
not decidedly an efﬁcient solution.
In light of the above, it is reasonable to think that, notwithstanding the
inevitable performance loss, cloud techniques will progressively spread into
HPC environments. As an example, Rocks, the widely used Linux distribution
for HPC clusters, provides support for virtual clusters starting from release 5.1
[8]. Virtual clusters are independent and separately conﬁgurable clusters
sharing the same HPC hardware. However, the availability of virtualization
software out-of-the-box might be not sufﬁcient to decide to switch to virtua-
lized environments for the typical HPC users, namely, scientists running high-
performance codes. Before making the choice, they would be aware of the
performance losses involved. But, unfortunately, these have not yet been
extensively evaluated and analyzed.
As pointed out above, the performance problem is hard due to the
intrinsically “intangible” and ﬂexible nature of cloud systems. This makes
difﬁcult (and maybe useless) to compare the performance of a given application
that executes in two different virtual environments received from a cloud. So,
given the extreme simplicity to ask from a cloud for additional computing
resources (with additional costs), it is almost impossible to make a choice that
maximizes the performance/cost ratio.
17.1
INTRODUCTION
439


In the remainder of this chapter, we will try to discuss this matter, pointing
out the importance of performance evaluation and prediction. First, we will
deal with the gridcloud relationship, outlining the state of the art for their
integration. Then we will focus on virtual clusters and on research contribu-
tions about performance evaluation of clouds.
The presentation is organized as follows: The next section (17.2) introduces
the fundamentals of cloud computing paradigm applied to HPC, aiming at
deﬁning the concepts and terminology concerning virtual clusters. Section 17.3
instead focuses on the relationship between grid and cloud, highlighting their
similarities and differences, the opportunity of their integration, and the
approaches proposed to this end. Section 17.4 focuses on performance-related
problems, which affect the adoption of cloud computing for HPC, pointing out
the need for methods, techniques, and tools for performance prediction of
clouds. The ﬁnal section (17.5) presents our conclusions.
17.2
BACKGROUND
As outlined in the introduction, the main question related to the adoption of
the cloud paradigm in HPC is related to the evaluation (and, possibly, to the
reduction) of possible performance losses compared to physical HPC hardware.
In clouds, performance penalties may appear at two different levels:
 Virtual Engine (VE). These are related to the performance loss introduced
by the virtualization mechanism. They are strictly related to the VE
technology adopted.
 Cloud Environment (CE). These are the losses introduced at a higher level
by the cloud environment, and they are mainly due to overheads and to
the sharing of computing and communication resources.
The actual hardware used in the cloud, along with the losses at the VE and CE
levels, will determine the actual performance of applications running in the
cloud. As will be discussed later, for HPC users the ﬁnal perceived performance
will be not so much affected by VE and CE levels as by the class of the physical
hardware (computing and interconnect) making up the cloud. Even if the
computing nodes adopted in cloud are not too different from those making up
(economical) HPC clusters, it is a fact that these usually adopt suitable network
switches, like Myrinet or Inﬁniband, which provide high bandwidth and low
latency. These networks typically are not available, at the state of the art, in
commercial cloud environments. In practice, their relatively slow interconnects
can easily dwarf the effect of VE and CE overheads. However, we will not
consider here this hardware factor, because it is not under the cloud user’s
control. Additional considerations on the cloud hardware and its impact on the
performance of HPC applications will be presented in Section 17.3.
440
PERFORMANCE PREDICTION FOR HPC ON CLOUDS


The conﬁguration and performance analysis of virtual clusters poses
problems that are considerably more complex than those involved in the
use of physical clusters. The objective of this section is to present the main
problems and to introduce a clear and sound terminology, which is still lacking
in the literature.
A traditional cluster—that is, a physical cluster—can be schematized as in
Figure 17.1. It is essentially made up of a front-end (typically used only for
administration purposes, often the only node with a public IP address) and a
number of (physical) processing nodes. These are, turn, provided with a single
CPU or with multiple CPUs sharing a common memory and I/O resources. The
multiple CPUs may be multiple cores on a single processor chip, a traditional
single-core CPUs working in SMP mode, a “ﬁctitious” CPU obtained by
hyperthreading, or a mixture of all the above.
A physical cluster can execute multiple jobs in parallel, by assigning to every
job a subset of the total number of CPUs. Usually the choice is to use non-
overlapping subsets of CPUs, in order to avoid processor sharing among
multiple jobs. But, even doing so, the interconnection network (and the front-
end) are inevitably shared.
This may, or may not, introduce signiﬁcant overheads, depending on the
type of computations and their communication requirements and, above all, on
the characteristics of the interconnect. Anyway, very often this overhead is
tolerable.
A parallel application running in a physical cluster is composed of processes.
To exploit all the available computing resources, the application should use at
least a number of processes equal to the number of available CPUs (or, in the
case of concurrent jobs, equal to the number of CPU exclusively reserved for
the job). Redundant application decompositions (i.e., applications made up of
a number of processes higher than the number of CPUs) are possible and, in
some cases, they may even be more efﬁcient.
The main problem with physical clusters is that all jobs running on the cluster,
whether concurrent or non-concurrent, have to share the same operating system
(OS), the system and application libraries, and the operating environment
VFE
VLAN
VLAN
VLAN
VFE
VFE
FE
PN
PN
PN
VN
VN
VN
VN
VN
VN
VN
VN
VN
FE
NETWORK
NETWORK
PN
PN
PN
…
…
…
…
FIGURE 17.1. Physical and virtual cluster.
17.2
BACKGROUND
441


(system applications and tools). The frequently recurring requirements for
mutually exclusive or incompatible libraries and support software make physical
cluster management a nightmare for system administrators.
Basically, a virtual cluster is made up of a virtual front-end and a number of
virtual nodes (see Figure 17.1). Virtual front-ends are obtained by virtualiza-
tion of a physical front-end machine, and virtual nodes are obtained by
virtualization of physical processing nodes.
Even if, strictly speaking, in a virtual cluster the front-end could be
virtualized as compute nodes, a simpler and less resource-demanding solution
is to use a physical front-end. Both with physical or virtual front-ends, virtual
cluster may have an execution environment of its own (OS, libraries, tools, etc.)
that is loaded and initialized when the cluster is created. The advantages of
cluster virtualization are clear: Every application can set up a proper execution
environment, which does not interfere with all other applications and virtual
clusters running on the hardware. Moreover, the network trafﬁc of every
virtual cluster is encapsulated in a separate VLAN. However, most likely all
VLANs will share the physical network resources.
As shown in Figure 17.1, every virtual processing node can host one or several
virtual machines (VMs), each running a private OS instance. These may belong to
the same or to different virtual clusters. At least in theory, the number of VMs is
limited only by resource consumption (typically, physical memory). In turn, each
VM is provided with several virtual CPUs (VCPUs). A virtual machine manager
running in every node makes it possible to share the physical CPUs among the
VCPUs deﬁned on the node (which may belong to a single virtual cluster or
to several virtual clusters). Typically, it is possible to deﬁne VCPU afﬁnity and to
force every VCPU to run on a subset of the physical CPUs available.
It is worth noting that, given a physical node provided with n CPUs, there
are two possibilities to exploit all the computing resources available:
 Using n VMs (each running its OS instance) with one, or even several,
VCPUs;
 Using a single VM with at least n VCPUs.
On the other hand, the use in a node of v VCPUs, with v . n, whether in a
single or in multiple VMs, leads to a ﬁctitious multiplication of computing
resources. In nodes where CPU resources are multiplied, the virtual clusters
not only share memory, communication hardware, and the virtual machine
manager, but also share CPU cycles, with a more direct effect on overall
computing performance.
17.3
GRID AND CLOUD
“Grid vs Cloud” is the title of an incredible number of recent Web blogs and
articles in on-line forums and magazines, where many HPC users express their
442
PERFORMANCE PREDICTION FOR HPC ON CLOUDS


own opinion on the relationship between the two paradigms [11, 28, 29, 40].
Cloud is simply presented, by its supporters, as an evolution of the grid. Some
consider grids and clouds as alternative options to do the same thing in a different
way. However, there are very few clouds on which one can build, test, or run
compute-intensive applications. In fact it still necessary to deal with some open
issues. One is when, in term of performance, a cloud is better than a grid to run a
speciﬁc application. Another problem to be addressed concerns the effort to port
a grid application to a cloud. In the following it will be discussed how these and
other arguments suggest that we investigate the integration of grids and clouds to
improve the exploitation of computing resources in HPC.
17.3.1
Grid and Cloud as Alternatives
Both grid and cloud are technologies that have been conceived to provide users
with handy computing resources according to their speciﬁc requirements.
Grid was designed with a bottom-up approach [9, 30, 31, 39]. Its goal is to
share a hardware or a software among different organizations by means of
common protocols and policies. The idea is to deploy interoperable services in
order to allow the access to physical resources (CPU, memory, mass storage,
etc.) and to available software utilities. Users get access to a real machine. Grid
resources are administrated by their owners. Authorized users can invoke grid
services on remote machines without paying and without service level guaran-
tees. A grid middleware provides a set of API (actually services) to program a
heterogeneous, geographically distributed system.
On the other hand, cloud technology was designed using a top-down
approach. It aims at providing its users with a speciﬁc high-level functionality:
a storage, a computing platform, a specialized service. They get virtual
resources from the cloud. The underlying hardware/software infrastructure is
not exposed. The only information the user needs to know is the quality of
service (QoS) of the services he is paying for. Bandwidth, computing power,
and storage represent parameters that are used for specifying the QoS and for
billing. Cloud users ask for a high-level functionality (service, platform,
infrastructure), pay for it, and become owners of a virtual machine. From a
technological point of view, virtualization is exploited to build an insulated
environment, which is conﬁgured to meet users’ requirements and is exploited
for easy reconﬁguration and backup. A single enterprise is the owner of the
cloud platform (software and underlying hardware), whereas customers be-
come owners of the virtual resources they pay for.
Cloud supporters claim that the cloud is easy to be used [9], is scalable [10],
and always gives users exactly what they want. On the other hand, grid is
difﬁcult to be used, does not give performance guarantees, is used by narrow
communities of scientists to solve speciﬁc problems, and does not actually
support interoperability [9].
Grid fans answer [11] that grid users do not need a credit card, that
around the world there are many examples of successful projects, and that a
17.3
GRID AND CLOUD
443


great number of computing nodes connected across the net execute large-
scale scientiﬁc applications, addressing problems that could not be solved
otherwise. Grid users can use a reduced set of functionalities and can develop
simple applications, or they can get, theoretically, an inﬁnite amount of
resources.
As always, truth is in the middle. Some users prefer to pay since they need a
speciﬁc service with strict requirements and require a guaranteed QoS. Cloud
can provide this. Many users of the scientiﬁc community look for some sort of
supercomputing architecture to solve intensive computations that process a
huge amount of data, and they do not care about getting a guaranteed
performance level. The grid can provide it. But, even on this last point, there
are divergent opinions.
17.3.2
Grid and Cloud Integration
To understand why grids and clouds should be integrated, we have to start by
considering what the users want and what these two technologies can provide.
Then we can try to understand how cloud and grid can complement each other
and why their integration is the goal of intensive research activities [12]. We
know that a supercomputer runs faster than a virtualized resource. For
example, a LU benchmark on EC2 (the cloud platform provided by Amazon)
runs slower, and some overhead is added to start VMs [13]. On the other hand,
the probability to execute an application in ﬁxed time on a grid resource
depends on many parameters and cannot be guaranteed. As experimented in
Foster [13], if 400 msec is the time that an EC2 requires to execute an LU
benchmark, then the probability of obtaining a grid resource in less that 400
msec is very low (34%), even if the same benchmark can take less than 100 msec
to complete.
If you want to get your results as soon as possible, you are adopting the
cloud end-user perspective. If you want to look for the optimum resources that
solve the problem, overcoming the boundaries of a single enterprise, you are
using the grid perspective that aims at optimizing resources sharing and system
utilization.
The integration of cloud and grid, or at least their integrated utilization, has
been proposed [14] since there is a trade-off between application turnaround
and system utilization, and sometimes it is useful to choose the right
compromise between them.
Some issues to be investigated have been pointed out:
 Integration of virtualization into existing e-infrastructures
 Deployment of grid services on top of virtual infrastructures
 Integration of cloud-base services in e-infrastructures
 Promotion of open-source components to build clouds
 Grid technology for cloud federation
444
PERFORMANCE PREDICTION FOR HPC ON CLOUDS


In light of the above, the integration of the two environments is a debated issue
[9]. At the state of the art, two main approaches have been proposed:
 Grid on Cloud. A cloud IaaS (Infrastructure as a Service) approach is
adopted to build up and to manage a ﬂexible grid system [15]. Doing so,
the grid middleware runs on a virtual machine. Hence the main drawback
of this approach is performance. Virtualization inevitably entails perfor-
mance losses as compared to the direct use of physical resources.
 Cloud on Grid: The stable grid infrastructure is exploited to build up a
cloud environment. This solution is usually preferred [7, 16] because the
cloud approach mitigates the inherent complexity of the grid. In this case,
a set of grid services is offered to manage (create, migrate, etc.) virtual
machines. The use of Globus workspaces [16], along with a set of grid
services for the Globus Toolkit 4, is the prominent solution, as in the
Nimbus project [17].
The integration could simplify the task of the HPC user to select, to conﬁgure,
and to manage resources according to the application requirements. It adds
ﬂexibility to exploit available resources, but both of the above-presented
approaches have serious problems for overall system management, due to the
complexity of the resulting architectures. Performance prediction, application
tuning, and benchmarking are some of the relevant activities that become
critical and that cannot be performed in the absence of performance evaluation
of clouds.
17.4
HPC IN THE CLOUD: PERFORMANCE-RELATED ISSUES
This section will discuss the issues linked to the adoption of the cloud paradigm
in the HPC context. In particular, we will focus on three different issues:
1. The difference between typical HPC paradigms and those of current
cloud environments, especially in terms of performance evaluation.
2. A comparison of the two approaches in order to point out their
advantages and drawbacks, as far as performance is concerned.
3. New performance evaluation techniques and tools to support HPC in
cloud systems.
As outlined in the previous sections, the adoption of the cloud paradigm for
HPC is a ﬂexible way to deploy (virtual) clusters dedicated to execute HPC
applications. The switch from a physical to a virtual cluster is completely
transparent for the majority of HPC users, who have just terminal access to the
cluster and limit themselves to “launch” their tasks.
The ﬁrst and well-known difference between HPC and cloud environments
is the different economic approach: (a) buy-and-maintain for HPC and
17.4
HPC IN THE CLOUD: PERFORMANCE-RELATED ISSUES
445


(b) pay-per-use in cloud systems. In the latter, every time that a task is started,
the user will be charged for the used resources. But it is very hard to know in
advance which will be the resource usage and hence the cost. On the other hand,
even if the global expense for a physical cluster is higher, once the system has
been acquired, all the costs are ﬁxed and predictable (in fact, they are so until
the system is not faulty). It would be great to predict, albeit approximately, the
resource usage of a target application in a cloud, in order to estimate the cost of
its execution.
These two issues above are strictly related, and a performance problem
becomes an economic problem. Let us assume that a given application is well-
optimized for a physical cluster. If it behaves on a virtual cluster as on the
physical one, it will use the cloud resources in an efﬁcient way, and its execution
will be relatively cheap. This is not so trivial as it may seem, as the pay-per-use
paradigm commonly used in commercial clouds (see Table 17.1) charges the
user for virtual cluster up-time, not for CPU usage. Almost surprisingly, this
means that processor idle time has a cost for cloud users.
For clarity’s sake, it is worth presenting a simple but interesting example
regarding performance and cost. Let us consider two different virtual clusters
with two and four nodes, respectively. Let us assume that the application is
well-optimized and that, at least for a small number of processors, it gets linear
speed-up. The target application will be executed in two hours in the ﬁrst cluster
and in one hour in the second one. Let the execution cost be X dollars per hour
per machine instance (virtual node). This is similar to the charging scheme of
EC2. The total cost is given by
hcost per hour per instancei  hnumberofinstancesi  hhoursi
In the ﬁrst case (two-node cluster) the cost will be X*2*2, whereas in the second
one it will be X*1*4. It turns out that the two conﬁgurations have the same cost
for the ﬁnal user, even if the ﬁrst execution is slower than the second. Now if we
consider an application that is not well-optimized and has a speed-up less than
the ideal one, the running time on the large virtual cluster will be longer than
two hours; as a consequence, the cost of the run of the second virtual cluster
TABLE 17.1. Example of Cost Criteria
Cloud Provider
Index
Description
Amazon
$/hour
Cost (in $) per hour of activity of the virtual
machines.
Amazon
$/GB
Cost (in $) per Gigabyte transferred outside
the cloud zone (transfers inside the same
zone have no price)
GoGrid
$*RAM/hour
Cost (in $) by RAM memory allocated per
hour
446
PERFORMANCE PREDICTION FOR HPC ON CLOUDS


will be higher than that on the small one. In conclusion: In clouds, performance
counts two times. Low performance means not only long waiting times, but
also high costs. The use of alternative cost factors (e.g., the RAM memory
allocated, as for GoGrid in Table 17.1) leads to completely different considera-
tions and requires different application optimizations to reduce the ﬁnal cost of
execution.
In light of the above, it is clear that the typical HPC user would like to know
how long his application will run on the target cluster and which conﬁguration
has the highest performance/cost ratio. The advanced user, on the other hand,
would also know if there is a way to optimize its application so as to reduce the
cost of its run without sacriﬁcing performance. The high-end user, who cares
more for performance than for the cost to be sustained, would like instead to
know how to choose the best conﬁguration to maximize the performance of his
application. In other words, in the cloud world the hardware conﬁguration is
not ﬁxed, and it is not the starting point for optimization decisions. Conﬁg-
urations can be easily changed in order to ﬁt the user needs. All the three classes
of users should resort to performance analysis and prediction tools. But,
unfortunately, prediction tools for virtual environments are not available, and
the literature presents only partial results on the performance analysis of such
systems.
An additional consequence of the different way that HPC users exploit a
virtual cluster is that the cloud concept makes very different the system
dimensioning—that is, the choice of the system conﬁguration ﬁt for the user
purposes (cost, maximum response time, etc.). An HPC machine is chosen and
acquired, aiming to be at the top of available technology (under inevitable
money constraints) and to be able to sustain the highest system usage that may
eventually be required. This can be measured in terms of GFLOPS, in terms of
number of runnable jobs, or by other indexes depending on the HPC
applications that will be actually executed. In other words, the dimensioning
is made by considering the peak system usage. It takes place at system
acquisition time, by examining the machine speciﬁcations or by assembling it
using hardware components of known performance. In this phase, simple and
global performance indexes are used (e.g., bandwidth and latency for the
interconnect, peak FLOPS for the computing nodes, etc.).
In clouds, instead, the system must be dimensioned by ﬁnding out an
optimal trade-off between application performance and used resources. As
mentioned above, the optimality is a concept that is fairly different, depending
on the class of users. Someone would like to obtain high performance at any
cost, whereas others would privilege economic factors. In any case, as the
choice of the system is not done once and for all, the dimensioning of the virtual
clusters takes place every time the HPC applications have to be executed on
new datasets. In clouds, the system dimensioning is a task under the control of
the user, not of the system administrator. This completely changes the scenario
and makes the dimensioning a complex activity, eager for performance data
and indexes that can be measured fairly easily in the HPC world on physical
17.4
HPC IN THE CLOUD: PERFORMANCE-RELATED ISSUES
447


systems, but that are not generally available for complex and rapidly changing
systems as virtual clusters.
Table 17.2 summarizes the differences between HPC classical environments
and HPC in clouds. To summarize the above discussion, in systems (the clouds)
where the availability of performance data is crucial to know how fast your
applications will run and how much you will pay, there is great uncertainty
about what to measure and how to measure, and there are great difﬁculties
when attempting to interpret the meaning of measured data.
17.4.1
HPC Systems and HPC on Clouds: A Performance
Comparison
The second step of our analysis is a performance comparison between classical
HPC systems and the new cloud paradigm. This will make it possible to point
out the advantages and disadvantages of the two approaches and will enable us
to understand if and when clouds can be useful for HPC.
The performance characterization of HPC systems is usually carried out by
executing benchmarks. However, the only ones that make measurements of
virtual clusters at different levels and provide available results in the literature
[1822, 33, 34, 36] are the following:
 The LINPACK benchmark, a so-called kernel benchmark, which aims at
measuring the peak performance (in FLOPSs) of the target environment.
 The NAS Parallel Benchmarks (NPB), a set of eight programs designed to
help to evaluate the performance of parallel supercomputers, derived from
computational ﬂuid dynamics (CFD) applications and consisting of ﬁve
kernels and three pseudo-applications. As performance index, together
with FLOPS, it measures response time, network bandwidth usage, and
latency.
 mpptest, a microbenchmark that measures the performance of some of the
basic MPI message passing routines in a variety of different conditions. It
measures (average) response time, network bandwidth usage and latency.
TABLE 17.2. Differences Between “Classical” HPC and HPC in Cloud Environments
Problem
HPC
HPC in Clouds
Cost
Buy-and-maintain
paradigm
Pay-per-use paradigm
Performance
optimization
Tuning of the application
to the hardware
Joint tuning of application
and system
System dimensioning
At system acquisition time,
using global performance
indexes under system ad-
ministrator control
At every application
execution, using application
oriented performance
indexes, under user control
448
PERFORMANCE PREDICTION FOR HPC ON CLOUDS


When these benchmarks are executed on physical machines (whether clusters
or other types of parallel hardware), they give a coarse-level indication of the
system potentialities. In the HPC world, these benchmarks are of common use
and widely diffused, but their utility is limited. Users usually have an in-depth
knowledge of the target hardware used for executing their applications, and a
comparison between two different (physical) clusters makes sense only for
Top500 classiﬁcation or when they are acquired. HPC users usually outline the
potentiality and the main features of their system through (a) a brief description
of the hardware and (b) a few performance indexes obtained using some of the
above-presented benchmarks. In any case, these descriptions are considered
useless for application performance optimization, because they only aim at
providing a rough classiﬁcation of the hardware.
Recently, the benchmarking technique has been adopted in a similar way,
tackling also the problem of the utility of the cloud paradigm for scientiﬁc
applications. In particular, the papers focusing on the development of applica-
tions executed in virtual clusters propose the use of a few benchmarks to outline
the hardware potentialities [22, 23]. These results are of little interest for our
comparison. On the other hand, papers that present comparisons between
virtual and physical clusters [18, 2022, 36, 37] use benchmarks to ﬁnd out the
limits of cloud environments, as discussed below. In the following, we will focus
on these results.
We can start our analysis from benchmark-based comparison of virtual
clusters and physical HPC systems. In the literature there are results on all three
types of benchmarks mentioned above, even if the only cloud provider
considered is Amazon EC2 (there are also results on private clusters, but in
those cases the analysis focuses on virtual engine level and neglects the effects of
the cloud environment, and so it is outside the scope of this chapter).
Napper and Bientinesi [20] and Ostermann et al. [21] adopted the LINPACK
benchmark, measuring the GFLOPS provided by virtual clusters composed of
Amazon EC2 virtual machines. Both studies point out that the values obtained
in the VCs are an order of magnitude lower than equivalent solutions on physical
clusters. The best result found in the literature is about 176 GFLOPS, to be
compared to 37.64 TFLOPS of the last (worst) machine in Top500 list. Even if it
is reasonable that VCs peak performances are far from the supercomputer ones,
it is worth noting that the GFLOPS tends to decrease (being ﬁxed the memory
load) when the number of nodes increases. In other words, virtual clusters are
not so efﬁcient as physical clusters, at least for this benchmark. As shown later,
the main cause of this behavior is the inadequate internal interconnect.
An analysis by real-world codes, using the NPB (NAS parallel benchmark)
benchmark suite, was proposed in Walker [18], Ostermann et al. [21]. NPBs are
a collection of MPI-based HPC applications. The suite is organized so as to
stress different aspects of an HPC systemsfor example, computation, com-
munication, or I/O.
Walker [18] compared a virtual EC2 cluster to a physical cluster composed
of TeraGrid machines with similar hardware conﬁguration (i.e., the hardware
17.4
HPC IN THE CLOUD: PERFORMANCE-RELATED ISSUES
449


under the virtual cluster was the same adopted by the physical cluster). This
comparison pointed out that the overheads introduced by the virtualization
layer and the cloud environment level were fairly high. It should be noted that
Walker adopted for his analysis two virtual clusters made up of a very limited
number of nodes (two and four). But, even for such small systems, the
applications did not scale well with the number of nodes.
The last kind of benchmark widely adopted in the literature is the MPI kernel
benchmark, which measures response time, bandwidth, and latency for MPI
communication primitives. These tests, proposed by almost all the authors who
tried to run scientiﬁc applications on cloud-based virtual clusters, are coherent
with the results presented above. In all the cases in the literature, bandwidth
and, above all, latency have unacceptable values for HPC applications.
In the literature, at the best of the authors’ knowledge, there are currently no
other examples of virtual cluster benchmarking, even if the ongoing diffusion of
the paradigm will lead probably to a fast growth of this kind of results in the
next years. As mentioned above, the benchmarking technique is able to put in
evidence the main drawback linked to the adoption of cloud systems for HPC:
the unsatisfactory performance of the network connection between virtual
clusters. In any case, the performance offered by virtual clusters is not
comparable to the one offered by physical clusters.
Even if the results brieﬂy reported above are of great interest and can be of
help to get insight on the problem, they do not take into account the differences
between HPC machines and HPC in the cloud, which we have summarized at
the start of this section. Stated another way, the mentioned analyses simply
measure global performance indexes. But the scenario can drastically change if
different performance indexes are measured.
Just to start, the application response time is perhaps the performance index
of great importance in a cloud context. In fact, it is a measurement of interest
for the ﬁnal user and, above all, has a direct impact on the cost of the
application execution. An interesting consideration linked to response time was
proposed by Ian Foster in his blog [11]. The overall application response time
(RT) is given by the formula RT 5 h job submission timei 1 hexecution timei.
In common HPC environments (HPC system with batch queue, grids, etc.)
the job submission time may be fairly long (even minutes or hours, due to
necessity to get all the required computing resources together). On the other
hand, in a cloud used to run HPC workload (a virtual cluster dedicated to the
HPC user), queues (and waiting time) simply disappear. The result is that, even
if the virtual cluster may offer a much lower computational power, the ﬁnal
response time may be comparable to that of (physical) HPC systems.
In order to take into account this important difference between physical and
virtual environments, Foster suggests to evaluate the response time in terms of
probability of completion, which is a stochastic function of time, and represents
the probability that the job will be completed before that time. Note that the
stochastic behavior mainly depends on the job submission time, whereas
execution time is usually a deterministic value. So in a VC the probability of
450
PERFORMANCE PREDICTION FOR HPC ON CLOUDS


completion is a threshold function (it is zero before the value corresponding to
execution time of actual task, and one after). In a typical HPC environment,
which involves batch and queuing systems, the job submission time is stochastic
and fairly long, thus leading to a global completion time higher than the one
measured on the VC.
This phenomenon opens the way to a large adoption of the cloud approach,
at least for middle- or small-dimension HPC applications, where the computa-
tion power loss due to the use of the cloud is more tolerable. In Jha et al. [9] and
in the on-line discussion [13] it is well shown that the cloud approach could be
very interesting for substituting the ecosystem of HPC clusters that are usually
adopted for solving middle-dimension problems. This is a context in which the
grid paradigm was never largely adopted because of the high startup overhead.
17.4.2
Supporting HPC in the Cloud
The above-presented analysis shows how the cloud approachhas good chances to
bewidelyadoptedforHPC[32,35,38],eveniftherearelimitsoneshouldbeaware
of, before trying to switch to virtualized systems. Moreover, the differences
between “physical computing” and “virtual computing,” along with their impact
on performance evaluation, clearly show that common performance indexes,
techniques, and tools for performance analysis and prediction should be suitably
adapted to comply with the new computing paradigm.
To support HPC applications, a fundamental requirement from a cloud
provider is that an adequate service-level agreement (SLA) is granted. For HPC
applications, the SLA should be different from the ones currently offered for
the most common uses of cloud systems, oriented at transactional Web
applications. The SLA should offer guarantees useful for the HPC user to
predict his application performance behavior and hence to give formal (or semi-
formal) statements about the parameters involved. At the state of the art, cloud
providers offer their SLAs in the form of a contract (hence in natural language,
with no formal speciﬁcation). Two interesting examples are Amazon EC2
(http://aws.amazon.com/ec2-sla/) and GoGrid (http://www.gogrid.com/legal/
sla.php).
The ﬁrst one (Amazon) stresses fault tolerance parameters (such as service
uptime), offering guarantees about system availability. There are instead no
guarantees about network behavior (for both internal and external network),
except that it will “work” 95% of the time. Moreover, Amazon guarantees that
the virtual machine instances will run using a dedicated memory (i.e., there will
be no other VM allocated to on the physical machine using the same memory).
This statement is particularly relevant for HPC users, because it is of great help
for the performance predictability of applications.
On the other hand, GoGrid, in addition to the availability parameters, offers
a clear set of guarantees on network parameters, as shown in Table 17.3. This
kind of information is of great interest, even if the guaranteed network latency
(order of milliseconds) is clearly unacceptable for HPC applications. GoGrid
17.4
HPC IN THE CLOUD: PERFORMANCE-RELATED ISSUES
451


does not offer guarantees about the sharing of physical computing resources
with other virtual machines.
In conclusion, even if the adoption of SLA could be (part of) a solution for
HPC performance tuning, giving a clear reference for the offered virtual cluster
performances, current solutions offer too generic SLA contracts or too poor
values for the controlled parameters.
As regards performance measurement techniques and tools, along with their
adaption for virtualized environments, it should be noted that very few
performance-oriented services are offered by cloud providers or by third parties.
Usually these services simply consist of more or less detailed performance
monitoring tools, such as CloudWatch offered by Amazon, or CloudStatus,
offered by Hyperic (and integrated in Amazon). These tools essentially measure
the performance of the cloud internal or external network and should help the
cloud user to tune his applications. In exactly the same way as SLAs, they can be
useful only for the transactional applications that are the primary objective of
cloud systems, since, at the state of the art, they do not offer any features to
predict the behavior of long-running applications, such as HPC codes.
An interesting approach, although still experimental, is the one offered by
solutions as C-meter [21] and PerfCloud [24], which offer frameworks that
dynamically benchmark the target VMs or VCs offered by the cloud. The idea
is to provide a benchmark-on-demand service to take into account the extreme
variability of the cloud load and to evaluate frequently its actual state. The ﬁrst
framework [25] supports the GrenchMark benchmark (which generates syn-
thetic workloads) and is oriented to Web applications. The second one, instead,
supports many different benchmarks typical of the HPC environment (the
above-mentioned NPB and MPP tests, the SkaMPI benchmark, etc.). More
detailed, the PerfCloud project aims at providing performance evaluation and
prediction services in grid-based clouds. Besides providing services for on-
demand benchmarking of virtual clusters, the PerfCloud framework uses the
benchmarking results to tune a simulator used for predict the performance of
HPC applications.
TABLE 17.3. Service-Level Agreement of GoGrid Network
Parameter
Description
GoGrid SLA
Jitter
Variation in latency
, 0.5msec
Latency
Amount of time it takes for a packet to
travel from one point to another
, 5 msec
Maximum
jitter
Highest permissible jitter within a given
period when there is no network outage
10 msec within any 15-min
period
Network
outage
Unscheduled period during which IP
services are not useable due to capacity-
constraints or hardware failures
None
Packet loss
Latency in excess of 10 seconds
, 0.1%
452
PERFORMANCE PREDICTION FOR HPC ON CLOUDS


17.5
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The conclusions of this overview on performance-related issues of cloud for
HPC are not particularly encouraging. From the analysis of existing work, a
number of considerations arise. Here we will try to summarize those that in our
opinion are the most relevant ones.
First of all, current cloud interconnects are simply not suitable for HPC uses.
The performance of a gigabit or 10-gigabit Ethernet is very good for running
workloads made up of monolithic tasks, but it is inadequate for the majority
of HPC parallel tasks. Upgrading existing clouds so as to provide high-
performance interconnects is not just an economic matter. Up until now,
drivers for these interconnects are not supported by state-of-the-art virtual
engines. And, as we have repeated many times in this chapter, virtual engines
are an integral part of clouds.
Secondly, the SLAs that have proven to be extremely useful in different
contexts have ﬁnally appeared in the commercial cloud ﬁeld. This is a good
starting point. But the problem is that their current formulation is (once again)
completely inadequate to express a quality of service that could be of interest
for HPC users. These need SLA deﬁned in a more formal way, along with
guarantees of particular parameters (essentially, low communication latency,
even if associated to higher jitter values).
But maybe the most important of the issues discussed here is that the criteria
for computing the cost of an application run do not encourage HPC users to
resort to clouds. Commercial cloud providers try to give machines in exclusive
use for computationally intensive tasks, and hence the cost to pay for this is
proportional to the total duration of the run. This is natural, after all. But this
choice penalizes the user that submits unoptimized applications, who pays even
for the application idle time. And this, from his point of view, is unfair. Because
an application well-optimized for a physical HPC system could likely be a non-
optimized application in the virtual world of clouds (e.g., due to the low-
performance interconnect), this is particularly disappointing. Furthermore, the
mentioned problem makes it particularly difﬁcult to estimate the cost of the run
of an application (at least, of its ﬁrst run).
We would like to conclude by pointing out that the HPC community has a lot
of work to do in order to make cloud more useful for their needs. The use of
virtualization and of leased computing resources is unstoppable and is an
unavoidable technologic trend, at least due to the power savings that it implies.
High-end HPC users would difﬁcultly resort to clouds. Or, at least, they would
not resort to present-day clouds. But the majority of “simple” HPC tasks
could immediately proﬁt from the scale economy that the cloud concept implies.
It is up to the scientiﬁc community to “level the ground” to make cloud use simple
and proﬁtable for most HPC users. This requires the availability of more insight
on the performance of virtual environments, the development of virtual-enabled
drivers for high-speed interconnects, and a pervasive use of performance
evaluation techniques. A successive step is the study and development of
17.5
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
453
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>


performance prediction tools, which have proved to be very useful in the
“physical machines” world, even if they have never been in widespread use
in the HPC community (maybe because up until now most users do not
pay for their program inefﬁciencies). Performance prediction of virtual and
cloud-based systems is indeed possible, and some of the authors of this chapter
are already working on it [24], but a lot of research and development work is
still necessary to have tools that could be used by the typical user without
hassle.
REFERENCES
1.
J. Sugerman, G. Venkitachalam, and B. H. Lim, Virtualizing I/O devices on
VMware workstation’s hosted virtual machine monitor, USENIX Annual Techni-
cal Conference, 2001.
2.
Xen Hypervisor, http://xen.org/
3.
VirtuaBox, http://www.virtualbox.org
4.
B. Sotomayor, R. S. Montero, I. M. Llorente, and I. Foster , Capacity leasing in
cloud systems using the OpenNebula engine, in Workshop on Cloud Computing and
its Applications 2008 (CCA08), October 2008, Online Publication.
5.
Enormaly Inc, http://www.enomaly.com
6.
D. Nurmi, R. Wolski, C. Grzegorczyk, G. Obertelli, S. Soman, L. Youseff, and
D. Zagorodnov, The Eucalyptus open-source cloud-computing system, in Proceed-
ings of the 9th IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster Computing and the
Grid (CCGrid 2009), May 2009, pp. 124131.
7.
K. Keahey, I. T. Foster, T. Freeman, and X. Zhang, Virtual workspaces:
Achieving quality of service and quality of life in the grid, Scientiﬁc Programming,
4(13):265275, 2005.
8.
P. M. Papadopoulos,
M. J. Katz, and G. Bruno, NPACI Rocks: Tools and
techniques for easily deploying manageable linux clusters, Concurrency and
Computation: Practice and Experience, 7-8(15):707725, 2003.
9.
S. Jha, A. Merzky, and G. Fox, Using clouds to provide grids with higher levels of
abstraction and explicit support for usage modes, Concurrency and Computation:
Practice Experiences, 21(8):10871108, 2009.
10.
J. Myerson, Cloud Computing Versus Grid Computing, IBM, 2009, http://www
.ibm.com/developerworks/web/library/wa-cloudGrid/
11.
I. Foster, A critique of “Using Clouds to Provide Grids...”, http://ianfoster
.typepad.com/blog/2008/09/a-critique-of-u.html, September 2008.
12.
T. Rings, G. Caryer , J. Gallop, J. Grabowski, T. Kovacikova, S. Schulz, and
I. Stokes-Rees, Grid and cloud computing: Opportunities for integration with the
next generation network, Journal of Grid Computing, 2009.
13.
I. Foster, What’s Faster—A Supercomputer or EC2?, http://ianfoster.typepad.com/
blog/2009/08/whats-fastera-supercomputer-or-ec2.html, accessed September 2009.
14.
GridTalk-Grid Brieﬁngs, Grids and clouds: The new computing, http://www.olivier-
art.com/gridTalk/Documents/GridBrieﬁng_Grids_and_clouds.pdf, January 2009.
454
PERFORMANCE PREDICTION FOR HPC ON CLOUDS


15.
L. Cherkasova, D. Gupta, E. Ryabinkin, R. Kurakin, V. Dobretsov, and A. Vahdat,
Optimizing grid site manager performance with virtual machines, in Proceedings of
the 3rd USENIX Workshop on Real Large Distributed Systems (WORLDS ‘06),
Seattle, November 5, 2006.
16.
I. T. Foster, T. Freeman, K. Keahey, D. Scheftner, B. Sotomayor, and X. Zhang,
Virtual clusters for grid communities, in Proceedings of Cluster Computing and
Grid, IEEE Computer Society, 2006, pp. 513520.
17.
L. Youseff, R. Wolski, B. Gorda, and C. Krintz, Paravirtualization for HPC
Systems, in Proceedings of ISPA Workshops, Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
Vol. 4331, Springer, 2006, pp. 474486.
18.
E. Walker, Benchmarking Amazon ec2, USENIX Login, 33(5):1823, 2008.
19.
W. Voorsluys, J. Broberg, S. Venugopal, and R. Buyya, Cost of virtual machine
live migration in clouds: A performance evaluation, in Proceedings of the First
International Conference on Cloud Computing, CloudCom 2009, Beijing, China,
December 14, 2009.
20.
J. Napper and P. Bientinesi, Can cloud computing reach the top500?, in Proceed-
ings of the Combined Workshops on Unconventional High Performance Computing
Workshop Plus Memory Access Workshop, May 2009.
21.
S. Ostermann, A. Iosup, N. Yigitbasi, R. Prodan, T. Fahringer, and D. Epema, An
Early Performance Analysis of Cloud Computing Services for Scientiﬁc Comput-
ing, TU Delft/PDS Technical Report PDS-200812, December 2008.
22.
C. Evangelinos and C. N. Hill, Cloud computing for parallel scientiﬁc hpc
applications: Feasibility of running coupled atmosphereocean climate models
on amazon’s ec2, Cloud Computing and Its Applications, October 2008.
23.
E. Deelman, G. Singh, M. Livny, B. Berriman, and J. Good, The cost of doing
science on the cloud: The Montage example, in Proceedings of the 2008 ACM/IEEE
Conference on Supercomputing, November 2008, pp. 112.
24.
E. P. Mancini, M. Rak, and U. Villano: PerfCloud: Grid Services for performance-
oriented development of cloud computing applications, in Proceedings of WETICE
2009, 2009, pp. 201206.
25.
N. Yigitbasi, A. Iosup, D. Epema, and S. Ostermann, C-Meter: A Framework for
Performance Analysis of Computing Clouds, in Proceedings of the 9th IEEE/ACM
International Symposium on Cluster Computing and the Grid, 53(4), 2009,
pp. 472477.
26.
B. Rochwerger, J. Caceres, R. S. Montero, D. Breitgand, E. Elmroth, A. Galis,
E. Levy, I. M. Llorente, K. Nagin, and Y. Wolfsthal, The RESERVOIR model
and architecture for open federated cloud computing, IBM Systems Journal,
53(4):535545, 2009.
27.
K. Keahey, and T. Freeman, Contextualization: Providing one-click virtual
clusters, in eScience 2008, Indianapolis, IN, December 2008.
28.
Israeli Association of Grid Technology, Comparing Grid and Cloud Computing,
http://www.Grid.org.il/_Uploads/dbsAttachedFiles/Comparing-Cloud-Grid.pdf,
June 20, 2008.
29.
R. Buyya, D. Abramson, and J. Giddy, A case for economy grid architecture for
service-oriented grid computing, in Proceedings of the IPDPS, 10th IEEE Interna-
tional Heterogeneous Computing Workshop, San Francisco, April 23, 2001,
p. 20083.1, IEEE Computer Society.
REFERENCES
455


30.
R. Buyya, D. Abramson, and J. Giddy, Nimrod-G: An architecture for a resource
management and scheduling system in a global computational grid, in Proceedings
of the 4th International Conference on High Performance Computing in Asia-Paciﬁc
Region, Beijing, China, May 2000.
31.
R. Buyya, D. Abramson, J. Giddy, and H. Stockinger, Economic models for
resource management and scheduling in grid computing, Concurrency and Com-
putation: Practice and Experience, 14(1315):15071542, 2002.
32.
G. M. Christina Hoffa and J. G. Berriman, On the Use of Cloud Computing
for
Scientiﬁc
Workﬂows,
http://pegasus.isi.edu/publications/2008/Hoffa-
CloudComputing.pdf
33.
T. Sterling and D. Stark, A high-performance computing forecast: Partly cloudy,
Computing in Science and Engineering, 11(4):4249, 2009.
34.
B. Carpenter, IPv6 and the Future of the Internet, The Internet Society Member
Brieﬁng, July 23, 2001. http://www.isoc.org/brieﬁngs/001/
35.
J. Brandt, A. Gentile, J. Mayo, P. Pebay, D. Roe, D. Thompson, and M. Wong,
Resource monitoring and management with OVIS to enable HPC in cloud
computing environments, in Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE International Sympo-
sium on Parallel & Distributed Processing (IPDPS), IPDPS, May, 2009, pp. 18.
36.
W. Sobel, S. Subramanyam, A. Sucharitakul, J. Nguyen, H. Wong, A. Klepchu-
kov, S. Patil, A. Fox, and D. Patterson, Cloudstone: Multi-platform, multi-
language benchmark and measurement tools for web 2.0, in Proceedings of Cloud
Computing and Its Applications, 2008.
37.
J. Ekanayake and G. Fox, High performance parallel computing with clouds and
cloud technologies, in Proceedings of the First International Conference on Cloud
Computing, CloudCom 2009, Beijing, China, December 14, 2009.
38.
Y. Tanaka, H. Nakada, S. Sekiguchi, T. Suzumura, and S. Matsuoka, Ninf-G: A
reference implementation of RPC-based programming middleware for grid com-
puting, Journal of Grid Computing, 1(1):4151, 2003.
39.
M. Armbrust, A. Fox, R. Grifﬁth, A. D. Joseph, R. H. Katz, A. Konwinski,
G. Lee, D. A. Patterson, A. Rabkin, I. Stoica, and M. Zaharia, Above the Clouds:
A Berkeley View of Cloud Computing, Technical Report, TR. UCB/EECS-
200928, EECS Department, University of California, Berkeley, February 2009.
40.
M. D. de Assuncao, A. di Costanzo, and R. Buyya, Evaluating the cost-beneﬁt of
using cloud computing to extend the capacity of clusters, in Proceedings of the 18th
ACM international Symposium on High Performance Distributed Computing
(HPDC ‘09), June 2009, pp. 141150.
456
PERFORMANCE PREDICTION FOR HPC ON CLOUDS


PART V
APPLICATIONS


CHAPTER 18
BEST PRACTICES IN ARCHITECTING
CLOUD APPLICATIONS IN THE
AWS CLOUD
JINESH VARIA
18.1
INTRODUCTION
For several years, software architects have discovered and implemented several
concepts and best practices to build highly scalable applications. In today’s
“era of tera,” these concepts are even more applicable because of ever-growing
datasets, unpredictable trafﬁc patterns, and the demand for faster response
times. This chapter will reinforce and reiterate some of these traditional
concepts and discuss how they may evolve in the context of cloud computing.
It will also discuss some unprecedented concepts, such as elasticity, that have
emerged due to the dynamic nature of the cloud.
This chapter is targeted toward cloud architects who are gearing up to move
an enterprise-class application from a ﬁxed physical environment to a virtua-
lized cloud environment. The focus of this chapter is to highlight concepts,
principles, and best practices in creating new cloud applications or migrating
existing applications to the cloud.
18.2
BACKGROUND
As a cloud architect, it is important to understand the beneﬁts of cloud
computing. In this section, you will learn some of the business and technical
beneﬁts of cloud computing and different Amazon Web services (AWS)
available today.
Cloud Computing: Principles and Paradigms,
Edited by Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg and
Andrzej Goscinski
Copyright r 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
459


18.2.1
Business Beneﬁts of Cloud Computing
There are some clear business beneﬁts to building applications in the cloud. A
few of these are listed here:
Almost Zero Upfront Infrastructure Investment. If you have to build a large-
scale system, it may cost a fortune to invest in real estate, physical
security, hardware (racks, servers, routers, backup power supplies),
hardware management (power management, cooling), and operations
personnel. Because of the high upfront costs, the project would typically
require several rounds of management approvals before the project could
even get started. Now, with utility-style cloud computing, there is no ﬁxed
cost or startup cost.
Just-in-Time Infrastructure. In the past, if your application became popular
and your systems or your infrastructure did not scale, you became a victim
of your own success. Conversely, if you invested heavily and did not get
popular, you became a victim of your failure. By deploying applications
in-the-cloud with just-in-time self-provisioning, you do not have to worry
about pre-procuring capacity for large-scale systems. This increases agility,
lowers risk, and lowers operational cost because you scale only as you grow
and only pay for what you use.
More Efﬁcient Resource Utilization. System administrators usually worry
about procuring hardware (when they run out of capacity) and higher
infrastructure utilization (when they have excess and idle capacity). With
the cloud, they can manage resources more effectively and efﬁciently by
having the applications request and relinquish resources on-demand.
Usage-Based Costing. With utility-style pricing, you are billed only for the
infrastructure that has been used. You are not paying for allocated
infrastructure but instead for unused infrastructure. This adds a new
dimension to cost savings. You can see immediate cost savings (some-
times as early as your next month’s bill) when you deploy an optimization
patch to update your cloud application. For example, if a caching layer
can reduce your data requests by 70%, the savings begin to accrue
immediately and you see the reward right in the next bill. Moreover,
if you are building platforms on the top of the cloud, you can pass on
the same ﬂexible, variable usage-based cost structure to your own
customers.
Reduced Time to Market. Parallelization is one of the great ways to speed up
processing. If one compute-intensive or data-intensive job that can be run
in parallel takes 500 hours to process on one machine, with cloud
architectures [1], it would be possible to spawn and launch 500 instances
and process the same job in 1 hour. Having available an elastic
infrastructure provides the application with the ability to exploit paralle-
lization in a cost-effective manner reducing time to market.
460
BEST PRACTICES IN ARCHITECTING CLOUD APPLICATIONS IN THE AWS CLOUD


18.2.2
Technical Beneﬁts of Cloud Computing
Some of the technical beneﬁts of cloud computing includes:
Automation—“Scriptable Infrastructure”: You can create repeatable build
and deployment systems by leveraging programmable (API-driven)
infrastructure.
Auto-scaling: You can scale your applications up and down to match your
unexpected demand without any human intervention. Auto-scaling
encourages automation and drives more efﬁciency.
Proactive Scaling: Scale your application up and down to meet your
anticipated demand with proper planning understanding of your trafﬁc
patterns so that you keep your costs low while scaling.
More Efﬁcient Development Life Cycle: Production systems may be easily
cloned for use as development and test environments. Staging environ-
ments may be easily promoted to production.
Improved Testability: Never run out of hardware for testing. Inject and
automate testing at every stage during the development process. You can
spawn up an “instant test lab” with preconﬁgured environments only for
the duration of testing phase.
Disaster Recovery and Business Continuity: The cloud provides a lower cost
option for maintaining a ﬂeet of DR servers and data storage. With
the cloud, you can take advantage of geo-distribution and replicate the
environment in other location within minutes.
“Overﬂow” the Trafﬁc to the Cloud: With a few clicks and effective load
balancing tactics, you can create a complete overﬂow-proof application
by routing excess trafﬁc to the cloud.
18.2.3
Understanding the Amazon Web Services Cloud
The Amazon Web Services (AWS) cloud provides a highly reliable and scalable
infrastructure for deploying Web-scale solutions, with minimal support and
administration costs, and more ﬂexibility than you’ve come to expect from your
own infrastructure, either on-premise or at a datacenter facility. AWS offers
variety of infrastructure services today. The diagram below will introduce you
to the AWS terminology and help you understand how your application can
interact with different Amazon Web Services (Figure 18.1) and how different
services interact with each other. Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon
EC2)[2] is a Web service that provides resizable compute capacity in the cloud.
You can bundle the operating system, application software, and associated
conﬁguration settings into an Amazon machine image (AMI). You can then use
these AMIs to provision multiple virtualized instances as well as decommission
them using simple Web service calls to scale capacity up and down quickly, as
your capacity requirement changes. You can purchase either (a) on-demand
18.2
BACKGROUND
461


instances, in which you pay for the instances by the hour, or (b) reserved
instances, in which you pay a low, one-time payment and receive a lower usage
rate to run the instance than with an on-demand instance or spot instances
where you can bid for unused capacity and further reduce your cost. Instances
can be launched in one or more geographical regions. Each region has multiple
availability zones. Availability zones are distinct locations that are engineered
to be insulated from failures in other availability zones and provide inexpen-
sive, low-latency network connectivity to other availability zones in the same
region.
Elastic IP addresses allow you to allocate a static IP address and program-
matically assign it to an instance. You can enable monitoring on an Amazon EC2
instance using Amazon CloudWatch [3] in order to gain visibility into resource
utilization, operational performance, and overall demand patterns (including
metrics such as CPU utilization, disk reads and writes, and network trafﬁc). You
can create an auto-scaling group using the auto-scaling feature [4] to automati-
cally scale your capacity on certain conditions based on metric that Amazon
CloudWatch collects. You can also distribute incoming trafﬁc by creating an
elastic load balancer using the Elastic Load Balancing service [5]. Amazon Elastic
Block Storage (EBS)[6] volumes provide network-attached persistent storage to
Amazon EC2 instances. Point-in-time consistent snapshots of EBS volumes can
be created and stored on Amazon Simple Storage Service (Amazon S3)[7].
Amazon S3 is highly durable and distributed data store. With a simple Web
services interface, you can store and retrieve large amounts of data as objects in
buckets (containers) at any time, from anywhere on the Web using standard
Your Application
Amazon WorldWide Physical Infrastructure
(Geographical Regions, Availability Zones, Edge Locations)
Amazon
Virtual Private Cloud
Payment: Amazon FPS/DevPay
Amazon SQS Queues
Amazon SimpleDB Domains
Amazon SNS Topics
Amazon
RDS
Auto-
Scaling
Elastic
LB
Cloud
Watch
Amazon EC2 Instances
(On-Demand, Spot, Reserved)
Amazon Elastic
MapReduce JobFlows
Amazon S3
Objects and
Buckets
Snapshots
EBS
Volumes
Amazon
Cloud
Front
FIGURE 18.1. Amazon Web Services.
462
BEST PRACTICES IN ARCHITECTING CLOUD APPLICATIONS IN THE AWS CLOUD


HTTP verbs. Copies of objects can be distributed and cached at 14 edge
locations around the world by creating a distribution using Amazon Cloud-
Front service [8], a Web service for content delivery (static or streaming
content). Amazon SimpleDB[9] is a Web service that provides the core
functionality of a database—real-time lookup and simple querying of struc-
tured data—without the operational complexity. You can organize the dataset
into domains and can run queries across all of the data stored in a particular
domain. Domains are collections of items that are described by attributevalue
pairs. Amazon Relational Database Service (Amazon RDS)[10] provides an
easy way to set up, operate, and scale a relational database in the cloud. You
can launch a DB instance and get access to a full-featured MySQL database and
not worry about common database administration tasks like backups, patch
management, and so on.
Amazon Simple Queue Service (Amazon SQS)[11] is a reliable, highly
scalable, hosted distributed queue for storing messages as they travel between
computers and application components.
Amazon Elastic MapReduce [12] provides a hosted Hadoop framework
running on the web-scale infrastructure of Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud
(AmazonEC2) and Amazon SimpleStorage Service (Amazon S3) andallowsyou
to create customized JobFlows. JobFlow is a sequence of MapReduce steps.
Amazon Simple Notiﬁcations Service (Amazon SNS) provides a simple way
to notify applications or people from the cloud by creating Topics and using a
publish-subscribe protocol.[12]
Amazon Virtual Private Cloud (Amazon VPC)[13] allows you to extend
your corporate network into a private cloud contained within AWS. Amazon
VPC uses an IPSec tunnel mode that enables you to create a secure connection
between a gateway in your data center and a gateway in AWS.
AWS also offers various payment and billing services [14] that leverages
Amazon’s payment infrastructure.
All AWS infrastructure services offer utility-style pricing that require no long-
term commitments or contracts. For example, you pay by the hour for Amazon
EC2 instance usage and pay by the gigabyte for storage and data transfer in the
case of Amazon S3. More information about each of these services and their pay-
as-you-go pricing is available on the AWS Web site.
18.3
CLOUD CONCEPTS
The cloud reinforces some old concepts of building highly scalable Internet
architectures [15] and introduces some new concepts that entirely change the
way applications are built and deployed. Hence, when you progress from
concept to implementation, you might get the feeling that “Everything’s
changed, yet nothing’s different.” The cloud changes several processes, pat-
terns, practices, and philosophies and reinforces some traditional service-
oriented architectural principles that you have learned because they are even
18.3
CLOUD CONCEPTS
463


more important than before. In this section, you will see some of those new
cloud concepts and reiterated SOA concepts.
Traditional applications were built with some pre-conceived mindsets that
made economic and architectural-sense at the time they were developed. The
cloud brings some new philosophies that you need to understand, and these are
discussed below.
18.3.1
Building Scalable Architectures
It is critical to build a scalable architecture in order to take advantage of a
scalable infrastructure.
The cloud is designed to provide conceptually inﬁnite scalability. However,
you cannot leverage all that scalability in infrastructure if your architecture is
not scalable. Both have to work together. You will have to identify the
monolithic components and bottlenecks in your architecture, identify the areas
where you cannot leverage the on-demand provisioning capabilities in your
architecture, and work to refactor your application in order to leverage the
scalable infrastructure and take advantage of the cloud.
Characteristics of a truly scalable application:
 Increasing resources results in a proportional increase in performance.
 A scalable service is capable of handling heterogeneity.
 A scalable service is operationally efﬁcient.
 A scalable service is resilient.
 A scalable service should become more cost effective when it grows (cost
per unit reduces as the number of units increases).
These are things that should become an inherent part of your application; and
if you design your architecture with the above characteristics in mind, then
both your architecture and infrastructure will work together to give you the
scalability you are looking for.
18.3.2
Understanding Elasticity
Figure 18.2 illustrates the different approaches a cloud architect can take to
scale their applications to meet the demand.
Scale-Up Approach. Not worrying about the scalable application architec-
ture and investing heavily in larger and more powerful computers
(vertical scaling) to accommodate the demand. This approach usually
works to a point, but either it could cost a fortune (see “Huge capital
expenditure” in Figure 18.2) or the demand could outgrow capacity
before the new “big iron” is deployed (see “You just lost your customers”
in diagram).
464
BEST PRACTICES IN ARCHITECTING CLOUD APPLICATIONS IN THE AWS CLOUD


The Traditional Scale-Out Approach. Creating an architecture that scales
horizontally and investing in infrastructure in small chunks. Most of the
businesses and large-scale Web applications follow this pattern by
distributing their application components, federating their datasets, and
employing a service-oriented design. This approach is often more effective
than a scale-up approach. However, this still requires predicting the
demand at regular intervals and then deploying infrastructure in chunks
to meet the demand. This often leads to excess capacity (“burning cash”)
and constant manual monitoring (“burning human cycles”). Moreover, it
usually does not work if the application is a victim of a viral ﬁre (often
referred to as the Slashdot Effect [16]).
Note: Both approaches have initial startup costs, and both approaches are
reactive in nature.
Traditional infrastructure generally necessitates predicting the amount of
computing resources your application will use over a period of several years. If
you underestimate, your applications will not have the horsepower to handle
unexpected trafﬁc, potentially resulting in customer dissatisfaction. If you
overestimate, you’re wasting money with superﬂuous resources.
The on-demand and elastic nature of the cloud approach (automated
elasticity), however, enables the infrastructure to be closely aligned (as it
expands and contracts) with the actual demand, thereby increasing overall
utilization and reducing cost.
Predicted demand
Automated Elasticity  Scalability
Time t
Too much excess capacity
“Opportunity cost”
You just lost your
customers
Infrastrcture Cost $$
Huge capital
expenditure
Actual demand
Scale-up approach
Traditional scale-out
approach
Automated elasticity
FIGURE 18.2. Automated elasticity.
18.3
CLOUD CONCEPTS
465


Elasticity is one of the fundamental properties of the cloud. Elasticity is the
power to scale computing resources up and down easily and with minimal
friction. It is important to understand that elasticity will ultimately drive most
of the beneﬁts of the cloud. As a cloud architect, you need to internalize this
concept and work it into your application architecture in order to take
maximum beneﬁt of the cloud.
Traditionally, applications have been built for ﬁxed, rigid, and pre-
provisioned infrastructure. Companies never had the need to provision and
install servers on a daily basis. As a result, most software architectures do not
address the rapid deployment or reduction of hardware. Since the provisioning
time and upfront investment for acquiring new resources was too high,
software architects never invested time and resources in optimizing for hard-
ware utilization. It was acceptable if the hardware on which the application is
running was underutilized. The notion of “elasticity” within an architecture
was overlooked because the idea of having new resources in minutes was not
possible.
With the cloud, this mindset needs to change. Cloud computing streamlines
the process of acquiring the necessary resources; there is no longer any need to
place orders ahead of time and to hold unused hardware captive. Instead, cloud
architects can request what they need mere minutes before they need it or
automate the procurement process, taking advantage of the vast scale and rapid
response time of the cloud. The same is applicable to releasing the unneeded or
underutilized resources when you don’t need them. If you cannot embrace the
change and implement elasticity in your application architecture, you might not
be able to take the full advantage of the cloud. As a cloud architect, you should
think creatively and think about ways you can implement elasticity in your
application. For example, infrastructure that used to run daily nightly builds
and performs regression and unit tests every night at 2:00 AM for two hours
(often termed as the “QA/Build box”) was sitting idle for rest of the day. Now,
with elastic infrastructure, one can run nightly builds on boxes that are “alive”
and being paid for only for 2 hours in the night. Likewise, an internal trouble
ticketing Web application that always used to run on peak capacity (5 servers
24 3 7 3 365) to meet the demand during the day can now be provisioned to
run on-demand (ﬁve servers from 9 AM to 5 PM and two servers for 5 PM to 9 AM)
based on the trafﬁc pattern.
Designing intelligent elastic cloud architectures, so that infrastructure runs
only when you need it, is an art in itself. Elasticity should be one of the
architectural design requirements or a system property. The questions that you
need to ask are as follows: What components or layers in my application
architecture can become elastic? What will it take to make that component
elastic? What will be the impact of implementing elasticity to my overall system
architecture?
In the next section, you will see speciﬁc techniques to implement elasticity in
your applications. To effectively leverage the cloud beneﬁts, it is important to
architect with this mindset.
466
BEST PRACTICES IN ARCHITECTING CLOUD APPLICATIONS IN THE AWS CLOUD


18.3.3
Not Fearing Constraints
When you decide to move your applications to the cloud and try to map your
system speciﬁcations to those available in the cloud, you will notice that cloud
might not have the exact speciﬁcation of the resource that you have on-premise.
For example, “Cloud does not provide X amount of RAM in a server” or “My
database needs to have more IOPS than what I can get in a single instance.”
You should understand that cloud provides abstract resources that become
powerful when you combine them with the on-demand provisioning model.
You should not be afraid and constrained when using cloud resources because
it is important to understand that even if you might not get an exact replica
of your hardware in the cloud environment, you have the ability to get more of
those resources in the cloud to compensate that need.
For example, if the cloud does not provide you with exact or greater amount
of RAM in a server, try using a distributed cache like memcached [17] or
partitioning your data across multiple servers. If your databases need more
IOPS and it does not directly map to that of the cloud, there are several
recommendations that you can choose from depending on your type of data
and use case. If it is a read-heavy application, you can distribute the read load
across a ﬂeet of synchronized slaves. Alternatively, you can use a sharding
[18] algorithm that routes the data where it needs to be or you can use various
database clustering solutions.
In retrospect, when you combine the on-demand provisioning capabilities
with the ﬂexibility, you will realize that apparent constraints can actually be
broken in ways that will actually improve the scalability and overall perfor-
mance of the system.
18.3.4
Virtual Administration
The advent of cloud has changed the role of System Administrator to a “Virtual
System Administrator.” This simply means that daily tasks performed by these
administrators have now become even more interesting as the administrators
learn more about applications and decide what’s best for the business as a
whole. The System Administrator no longer has a need to provision servers and
install software and wire up network devices since all of that grunt work is
replaced by few clicks and command line calls. The cloud encourages automa-
tion because the infrastructure is programmable. System administrators need to
move up the technology stack and learn how to manage abstract cloud
resources using scripts.
Likewise, the role of Database Administrator is changed into a “Virtual
Database Administrator” (DBA) in which he/she manages resources through a
Web-based console, executes scripts that add new capacity programmatically if
the database hardware runs out of capacity, and automates the day-to-day
processes. The virtual DBA has to now learn new deployment methods (virtual
machine images), embrace new models (query parallelization, geo-redundancy,
18.3
CLOUD CONCEPTS
467


and asynchronous replication [19]), rethink the architectural approach for data
(sharding [20], horizontal partitioning [15], federating [21]), and leverage
different storage options available in the cloud for different types of datasets.
In the traditional enterprise company, application developers may not work
closely with the network administrators and network administrators may not
have a clue about the application. As a result, several possible optimizations in
the network layer and application architecture layer are overlooked. With the
cloud, the two roles have merged into one to some extent. When architecting
future applications, companies need to encourage more cross-pollination of
knowledge between the two roles and understand that they are merging.
18.4
CLOUD BEST PRACTICES
In this section, you will learn about best practices that will help you build an
application in the cloud.
18.4.1
Design for Failure and Nothing Will Fail
Rule of Thumb:
Be a pessimist when designing architectures in the cloud;
assume things will fail. In other words, always design, implement, and deploy
for automated recovery from failure.
In particular, assume that your hardware will fail. Assume that outages will
occur. Assume that some disaster will strike your application. Assume that you
will be slammed with more than the expected number of requests per second
some day. Assume that with time your application software will fail too. By
being a pessimist, you end up thinking about recovery strategies during design
time, which helps in designing an overall system better.
If you realize that things fail over time and incorporate that thinking into
your architecture, as well as build mechanisms to handle that failure before
disaster strikes to deal with a scalable infrastructure, you will end up creating a
fault-tolerant architecture that is optimized for the cloud.
Questions that you need to ask: What happens if a node in your system fails?
How do you recognize that failure? How do I replace that node? What kind of
scenarios do I have to plan for? What are my single points of failure? If a load
balancer is sitting in front of an array of application servers, what if that
load balancer fails? If there are master and slaves in your architecture, what if
the master node fails? How does the failover occur and how is a new slave
instantiated and brought into sync with the master?
Just like designing for hardware failure, you have to also design for software
failure. Questions that you need to ask: What happens to my application if the
dependent services changes its interface? What if downstream service times out
or returns an exception? What if the cache keys grow beyond memory limit of
an instance?
468
BEST PRACTICES IN ARCHITECTING CLOUD APPLICATIONS IN THE AWS CLOUD


Build mechanisms to handle that failure. For example, the following
strategies can help in event of failure:
1. Have a coherent backup and restore strategy for your data and automate it.
2. Build process threads that resume on reboot.
3. Allow the state of the system to re-sync by reloading messages from
queues.
4. Keep preconﬁgured and preoptimized virtual images to support strategies
2 and 3 on launch/boot.
5. Avoid in-memory sessions or stateful user context; move that to data
stores.
Good cloud architectures should be impervious to reboots and re-launches. In
GrepTheWeb (discussed in the next section), by using a combination of
Amazon SQS and Amazon SimpleDB, the overall controller architecture is
very resilient to the types of failures listed in this section. For instance, if the
instance on which controller thread was running dies, it can be brought up and
resume the previous state as if nothing had happened. This was accomplished
by creating a preconﬁgured Amazon machine image, which, when launched,
dequeues all the messages from the Amazon SQS queue and reads their states
from an Amazon SimpleDB domain on reboot.
Designing with an assumption that underlying hardware will fail will prepare
you for the future when it actually fails.
This design principle will help you design operations-friendly applications,
as also highlighted in Hamilton’s paper [19]. If you can extend this principle to
proactively measure and balance load dynamically, you might be able to deal
with variance in network and disk performance that exists due to the multi-
tenant nature of the cloud.
AWS-Speciﬁc Tactics for Implementing This Best Practice
1. Failover gracefully using Elastic IPs: Elastic IP is a static IP that is
dynamically remappable. You can quickly remap and failover to
another set of servers so that your trafﬁc is routed to the new servers.
It works great when you want to upgrade from old to new versions or
in case of hardware failures.
2. Utilize multiple availability zones: Availability zones are conceptually
like logical datacenters. By deploying your architecture to multiple
availability zones, you can ensure high availability.
3. Maintain an Amazon Machine Image so that you can restore and
clone environments very easily in a different availability zone; main-
tain multiple database slaves across availability zones and set up hot
replication.
18.4
CLOUD BEST PRACTICES
469


4. Utilize Amazon CloudWatch (or various real-time open source mon-
itoring tools) to get more visibility and take appropriate actions in case
of hardware failure or performance degradation. Set up an Auto
scaling group to maintain a ﬁxed ﬂeet size so that it replaces unhealthy
Amazon EC2 instances by new ones.
5. Utilize Amazon EBS and set up cron jobs so that incremental snap-
shots are automatically uploaded to Amazon S3 and data are persisted
independent of your instances.
6. Utilize Amazon RDS and set the retention period for backups, so that
it can perform automated backups.
18.4.2
Decouple your Components
The cloud reinforces the SOA design principle that the more loosely coupled the
components of the system, the bigger and better it scales.
The key is to build components that do not have tight dependencies on each
other, so that if one component were to die (fail), sleep (not respond), or remain
busy (slow to respond) for some reason, the other components in the system are
built so as to continue to work as if no failure is happening. In essence, loose
coupling isolates the various layers and components of your application so that
each component interacts asynchronously with the others and treats them as a
“black box.” For example, in the case of Web application architecture, you can
isolate the app server from the Web server and from the database. The app
server does not know about your Web server and vice versa; this gives
decoupling between these layers, and there are no dependencies code-wise
nor functional perspectives. In the case of batch-processing architecture, you
can create asynchronous components that are independent of each other.
Questions you need to ask: Which business component or feature could be
isolated from current monolithic application and can run stand-alone sepa-
rately? And then how can I add more instances of that component without
breaking my current system and at the same time serve more users? How much
effort will it take to encapsulate the component so that it can interact with other
components asynchronously?
Decoupling your components, building asynchronous systems, and scaling
horizontally become very important in the context of the cloud. It will not only
allow you to scale out by adding more instances of same component but will
also allow you to design innovative hybrid models in which a few components
continue to run in on-premise while other components can take advantage of
the cloudscale and use the cloud for additional compute-power and bandwidth.
That way with minimal effort, you can “overﬂow” excess trafﬁc to the cloud by
implementing smart load balancing tactics.
One can build a loosely coupled system using messaging queues. If a queue/
buffer is used to connect any two components together (as shown in Figure 18.3
under Loose Coupling), it can support concurrency, high availability, and load
470
BEST PRACTICES IN ARCHITECTING CLOUD APPLICATIONS IN THE AWS CLOUD


spikes. As a result, the overall system continues to perform even if parts of
components are momentarily unavailable. If one component dies or becomes
temporarily unavailable, the system will buffer the messages and get them
processed when the component comes back up.
You will see heavy use of queues in GrepTheWeb architecture epitomized in
the next section. In GrepTheWeb, if lots of requests suddenly reach the server
(an Internet-induced overload situation) or the processing of regular expres-
sions takes a longer time than the median (slow response rate of a component),
the Amazon SQS queues buffer the requests in a durable fashion so that those
delays do not affect other components.
AWS Speciﬁc Tactics for Implementing This Best Practice
1. Use Amazon SQS to isolate components [22].
2. Use Amazon SQS as buffers between components [22].
3. Design every component such that it expose a service interface and is
responsible for its own scalability in all appropriate dimensions and
interacts with other components asynchronously.
4. Bundle the logical construct of a component into an Amazon Machine
Image so that it can be deployed more often.
5. Make your applications as stateless as possible. Store session state
outside of component (in Amazon SimpleDB, if appropriate).
Controller A
Queue
A
Queue
B
Queue
C
Call a
Method in
B from A
Call a
Method in
C from B
Controller B
Tight coupling (procedural programming)
Loose coupling (independent phases using queues)
Controller C
Controller A
Controller B
Controller C
FIGURE 18.3. Decoupling components using Queues.
18.4
CLOUD BEST PRACTICES
471


18.4.3
Implement Elasticity
The cloud brings a new concept of elasticity in your applications. Elasticity can
be implemented in three ways:
1. Proactive Cyclic Scaling. Periodic scaling that occurs at ﬁxed interval
(daily, weekly, monthly, quarterly).
2. Proactive Event-Based Scaling. Scaling just when you are expecting a big
surge of trafﬁc requests due to a scheduled business event (new product
launch, marketing campaigns).
3. Auto-scaling Based on Demand. By using a monitoring service, your
system can send triggers to take appropriate actions so that it scales up or
down based on metrics (utilization of the servers or network i/o, for
instance).
To implement elasticity, one has to ﬁrst automate the deployment process
and streamline the conﬁguration and build process. This will ensure that the
system can scale without any human intervention.
This will result in immediate cost beneﬁts as the overall utilization is
increased by ensuring your resources are closely aligned with demand rather
than potentially running servers that are underutilized.
Automate your Infrastructure. One of the most important beneﬁts of using
a cloud environment is the ability to use the cloud’s APIs to automate your
deployment process. It is recommended that you take the time to create an
automated deployment process early on during the migration process and not
wait until the end. Creating an automated and repeatable deployment process
will help reduce errors and facilitate an efﬁcient and scalable update process.
To automate the deployment process:
 Create a library of “recipes”—that is, small frequently used scripts (for
installation and conﬁguration).
 Manage the conﬁguration and deployment process using agents bundled
inside an AMI.
 Bootstrap your instances.
Bootstrap Your Instances. Let your instances ask you a question at boot:
“Who am I and what is my role?” Every instance should have a role (“DB server,”
“app server,” “slave server” in the case of a Web application) to play in the
environment. This role may be passed in as an argument during launch that
instructs the AMI when instantiated the steps to take after it has booted. On
boot, instances should grab the necessary resources (code, scripts, conﬁguration)
based on the role and “attach” itself to a cluster to serve its function.
472
BEST PRACTICES IN ARCHITECTING CLOUD APPLICATIONS IN THE AWS CLOUD


Beneﬁts of bootstrapping your instances:
1. It re-creates the (Dev, staging, Production) environment with few clicks
and minimal effort.
2. It affords more control over your abstract cloud-based resources.
3. It reduces human-induced deployment errors.
4. It creates a self-healing and self-discoverable environment which is more
resilient to hardware failure.
AWS-Speciﬁc Tactics to Automate Your Infrastructure
1. Deﬁne auto-scaling groups for different clusters using the Amazon
auto-scaling feature in Amazon EC2.
2. Monitor your system metrics (CPU, memory, disk I/O, network I/O)
using Amazon CloudWatch and take appropriate actions (launching
new AMIs dynamically using the auto-scaling service) or send
notiﬁcations.
3. Store and retrieve machine conﬁguration information dynamically:
Utilize Amazon SimpleDB to fetch conﬁg data during the boot-time of
an instance (e.g., database connection strings). SimpleDB may also be
used to store information about an instance such as its IP address,
machine name, and role.
4. Design a build process such that it dumps the latest builds to a bucket
in Amazon S3; download the latest version of an application from
during system startup.
5. Invest in building resource management tools (automated scripts,
preconﬁgured images) or use smart open source conﬁguration man-
agement tools like Chef [23], Puppet [24], CFEngine [25], or Genome
[26].
6. Bundle Just Enough Operating System (JeOS [27]) and your software
dependencies into an Amazon Machine Image so that it is easier to
manage and maintain. Pass conﬁguration ﬁles or parameters at launch
time and retrieve user data [28] and instance metadata after launch.
7. Reduce bundling and launch time by booting from Amazon EBS
volumes [29] and attaching multiple Amazon EBS volumes to an
instance. Create snapshots of common volumes and share snapshots
[30] among accounts wherever appropriate.
8. Application components should not assume health or location of
hardware it is running on. For example, dynamically attach the IP
address of a new node to the cluster. Automatically failover to the new
cloned instance in case of a failure.
18.4
CLOUD BEST PRACTICES
473


18.4.4
Think Parallel
The cloud makes parallelization effortless. Whether it is requesting data from
the cloud, storing data to the cloud, or processing data (or executing jobs)
in the cloud, as a cloud architect you need to internalize the concept of
parallelization when designing architectures in the cloud. It is advisable to not
only implement parallelization wherever possible but also automate it because
the cloud allows you to create a repeatable process every easily.
When it comes to accessing (retrieving and storing) data, the cloud is
designed to handle massively parallel operations. In order to achieve maximum
performance and throughput, you should leverage request parallelization.
Multi-threading your requests by using multiple concurrent threads will store
or fetch the data faster than requesting it sequentially. Hence, wherever
possible, the processes of a cloud application should be made thread-safe
through a share-nothing philosophy and leverage multi-threading.
When it comes to processing or executing requests in the cloud, it becomes
even more important to leverage parallelization. A general best practice, in the
case of a Web application, is to distribute the incoming requests across multiple
Web servers using load balancer. In the case of a batch processing application,
your master node can spawn up multiple slave worker nodes that process a task
in parallel (as in distributed processing frameworks like Hadoop [31]).
The beauty of the cloud shines when you combine elasticity and parallelization.
Your cloud application can bring up a cluster of compute instances that are
provisioned within minutes with just a few API calls, perform a job by
executing tasks in parallel, store the results, and terminate all the instances.
The GrepTheWeb application discussed in the next section is one such example.
AWS Speciﬁc Tactics for Parallelization
1. Multi-thread your Amazon S3 requests as detailed in a best practices
paper [32] [62].
2. Multi-thread your Amazon SimpleDB GET and BATCHPUT re-
quests [3335].
3. Create a JobFlow using the Amazon Elastic MapReduce Service for
each of your daily batch processes (indexing, log analysis, etc.) which
will compute the job in parallel and save time.
4. Use the Elastic Load Balancing service and spread your load across
multiple Web app servers dynamically.
18.4.5
Keep Dynamic Data Closer to the Compute
and Static Data Closer to the End User
In general it’s a good practice to keep your data as close as possible to your
compute or processing elements to reduce latency. In the cloud, this best
474
BEST PRACTICES IN ARCHITECTING CLOUD APPLICATIONS IN THE AWS CLOUD


practice is even more relevant and important because you often have to deal
with Internet latencies. Moreover, in the cloud, you are paying for bandwidth
in and out of the cloud by the gigabyte of data transfer, and the cost can add up
very quickly.
If a large quantity of data that need to be processed resides outside of
the cloud, it might be cheaper and faster to “ship” and transfer the data to the
cloud ﬁrst and then perform the computation. For example, in the case of a data
warehousing application, it is advisable to move the dataset to the cloud and
then perform parallel queries against the dataset. In the case of Web applica-
tions that store and retrieve data from relational databases, it is advisable to
move the database as well as the app server into the cloud all at once.
If the data are generated in the cloud, then the applications that consume the
data should also be deployed in the cloud so that they can take advantage of
in-cloud free data transfer and lower latencies. For example, in the case of an
e-commerce Web application that generates logs and clickstream data, it
is advisable to run the log analyzer and reporting engines in the cloud.
Conversely, if the data are static and not going to change often (e.g., images,
video, audio, PDFs, JS, CSS ﬁles), it is advisable to take advantage of a content
delivery service so that the static data are cached at an edge location closer to
the end user (requester), thereby lowering the access latency. Due to the
caching, a content delivery service provides faster access to popular objects.
AWS-Speciﬁc Tactics for Implementing This Best Practice
1. Ship your data drives to Amazon using the Import/Export service [36].
It may be cheaper and faster to move large amounts of data using the
sneakernet [37] than to upload using the Internet.
2. Utilize the same availability zone to launch a cluster of machines.
3. Create a distribution of your Amazon S3 bucket and let Amazon
CloudFront caches content in that bucket across all the 14 edge
locations around the world.
18.4.6
Security Best Practices
In a multi-tenant environment, cloud architects often express concerns about
security. Security should be implemented in every layer of the cloud application
architecture.
Physical security is typically handled by your service provider (Security
Whitepaper [38]), which is an additional beneﬁt of using the cloud. Network
and application-level security is your responsibility, and you should implement
the best practices as applicable to your business. In this section, you will learn
about some speciﬁc tools, features, and guidelines on how to secure your cloud
application in the AWS environment. It is recommended to take advantage of
18.4
CLOUD BEST PRACTICES
475
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>


these tools and features mentioned to implement basic security and then
implement additional security best practices using standard methods as
appropriate or as they see ﬁt.
Protect Your Data in Transit. If you need to exchange sensitive or con-
ﬁdential information between a browser and a Web server, conﬁgure SSL on
your server instance. You’ll need a certiﬁcate from an external certiﬁcation
authority like VeriSign [39] or Entrust [40]. The public key included in the
certiﬁcate authenticates your server to the browser and serves as the basis for
creating the shared session key used to encrypt the data in both directions.
Create a virtual private cloud by making a few command line calls (using
Amazon VPC). This will enable you to use your own logically isolated resources
within the AWS cloud, and then connect those resources directly to your own
data center using industry-standard encrypted IPSec VPN connections.
You can also set up [41] an OpenVPN server on an Amazon EC2 instance
and install the OpenVPN client on all user PCs.
Protect your Data at Rest. If you are concerned about storing sensitive and
conﬁdential data in the cloud, you should encrypt the data (individual ﬁles)
before uploading it to the cloud. For example, encrypt the data using any open
source [42] or commercial [43] PGP-based tools before storing it as Amazon S3
objects and decrypt it after download. This is often a good practice when
building HIPPA-compliant applications [44] that need to store protected health
information (PHI).
On Amazon EC2, ﬁle encryption depends on the operating system. Amazon
EC2 instances running Windows can use the built-in Encrypting File System
(EFS) feature [45] available in Windows. This feature will handle the encryption
and decryption of ﬁles and folders automatically and make the process
transparent to the users [46]. However, despite its name, EFS doesn’t encrypt
the entire ﬁle system; instead, it encrypts individual ﬁles. If you need a full
encrypted volume, consider using the open-source TrueCrypt [47] product;
this will integrate very well with NTFS-formatted EBS volumes. Amazon EC2
instances running Linux can mount EBS volumes using encrypted ﬁle systems
using a variety of approaches (EncFS [48], Loop-AES [49], dm-crypt [50],
TrueCrypt [51]). Likewise, Amazon EC2 instances running OpenSolaris can take
advantage of ZFS [52] encryption support [53]. Regardless of which approach
you choose, encrypting ﬁles and volumes in Amazon EC2 helps protect ﬁles and
log data so that only the users and processes on the server can see the data in
clear text, but anything or anyone outside the server sees only encrypted data.
No matter which operating system or technology you choose, encrypting
data at rest presents a challenge: managing the keys used to encrypt the data.
If you lose the keys, you will lose your data forever; and if your keys become
compromised, the data may be at risk. Therefore, be sure to study the key
management capabilities of any products you choose and establish a procedure
that minimizes the risk of losing keys.
476
BEST PRACTICES IN ARCHITECTING CLOUD APPLICATIONS IN THE AWS CLOUD


Besides protecting your data from eavesdropping, also consider how to
protect it from disaster. Take periodic snapshots of Amazon EBS volumes
to ensure that it is highly durable and available. Snapshots are incremental in
nature and stored on Amazon S3 (separate geo-location) and can be restored
back with a few clicks or command line calls.
Manage Multiple Users and their permissions with IAM. AWS Identity
and Access Management (IAM) enables you to create multiple Users and
manage the permissions for each of these Users within your AWS Account. A
User is an identity (within your AWS Account) with unique security credentials
that can be used to access AWS Services. IAM eliminates the need to share
passwords or access keys, and makes it easy to enable or disable a User’s access
as appropriate.
IAM enables you to implement security best practices, such as least privi-
lege, by granting unique credentials to every User within your AWS account
and only grant permission to access the AWS Services and resources required
for the Users to perform their job. IAM is secure by default; new Users have
no access to AWS until permissions are explicitly granted.
IAM is natively integrated into most AWS Services. No service APIs have
changed to support IAM, and applications and tools built on top of the AWS
service APIs will continue to work when using IAM. Applications only need to
begin using the access keys generated for a new User.
You should minimize the use of your AWS Account credentials as much as
possible when interacting with your AWS Services and take advantage of IAM
User credentials to access AWS Services and resources.
Protect your AWS Credentials. AWS supplies two types of security
credentials: AWS access keys and X.509 certiﬁcates. Your AWS access key
has two parts: your access key ID and your secret access key. When using the
REST or Query API, you have to use your secret access key to calculate a
signature to include in your request for authentication. To prevent in-ﬂight
tampering, all requests should be sent over HTTPS.
If your Amazon Machine Image (AMI) is running processes that need to
communicate with other AWS Web services (for polling the Amazon SQS
queue or for reading objects from Amazon S3, for example), one common
design mistake is embedding the AWS credentials in the AMI. Instead of
embedding the credentials, they should be passed in as arguments during
launch and encrypted before being sent over the wire [54].
If your secret access key becomes compromised, you should obtain a new
one by rotating [55] to a new access key ID. As a good practice, it is
recommended that you incorporate a key rotation mechanism into your
application architecture so that you can use it on a regular basis or occasionally
(when an disgruntled employee leaves the company) to ensure that compro-
mised keys can’t last forever.
18.4
CLOUD BEST PRACTICES
477


Alternately, you can use X.509 certiﬁcates for authentication to certain
AWS services. The certiﬁcate ﬁle contains your public key in a base64-encoded
DER certiﬁcate body. A separate ﬁle contains the corresponding base64-
encoded PKCS#8 private key. AWS supports multi-factor authentication [56]
as an additional protector for working with your account information on aws.
Amazon.com and AWS Management Console [57].
Secure Your Application. Every Amazon EC2 instance is protected by one
or more security groups [58]—that is, named sets of rules that specify which
ingress (i.e., incoming) network trafﬁc should be delivered to your instance.
You can specify TCP and UDP ports, ICMP types and codes, and source
addresses. Security groups give you basic ﬁrewall-like protection for running
instances. For example, instances that belong to a Web application can have
the security group settings shown in Figure 18.4.
Web
Server
Web
Server
Web
Server
Amazon EC2
Security Group
Firewall
Port 80 (HTTP)
and 443 (HTTPS)
of Web Layer
open to Internet
Only Permit
Web layer
access to
App Layer
Only Permit
App layer
access to
DB Layer
Only Port 22
(SSH) of App layer
open to only
developers in
corporate office
network
All other
traffic denied
App
Server
App
Server
App
Server
DB
Server
DB
Server
DB
Server
EBS
Volume
FIGURE 18.4. Securing your Web application using Amazon EC2 security groups.
478
BEST PRACTICES IN ARCHITECTING CLOUD APPLICATIONS IN THE AWS CLOUD


Another way to restrict incoming trafﬁc is to conﬁgure software-based
ﬁrewalls on your instances. Windows instances can use the built-in ﬁrewall [59].
Linux instances can use netﬁlter [60] and iptables.
Over time, errors in software are discovered and require patches to ﬁx. You
should ensure the following basic guidelines to maximize security of your
application:
 Regularly download patches from the vendor’s Web site and update your
AMIs.
 Redeploy instances from the new AMIs and test your applications to
ensure that the patches don’t break anything. Ensure that the latest AMI
is deployed across all instances.
 Invest in test scripts so that you can run security checks periodically and
automate the process.
 Ensure that the third-party software is conﬁgured to the most secure
settings.
 Never run your processes as root or Administrator login unless absolutely
necessary.
All the standard security practices in the pre-cloud era, such as adopting
good coding practices and isolating sensitive data, are still applicable and
should be implemented.
In retrospect, the cloud abstracts the complexity of the physical security
from you and gives you the control through tools and features so that you can
secure your application.
18.5
GREPTHEWEB CASE STUDY
The Alexa Web Search1 Web service allows developers to build customized
search engines against the massive data that Alexa generates (using a Web
crawl) every night. One of the features of their Web service allows users to
query the Alexa search index and get Million Search Results (MSR) back as
output. Developers can run queries that return up to 10 million results.
The resulting set, which represents a small subset of all the documents on the
Web, can then be processed further using a regular expression language. This
allows developers to ﬁlter their search results using criteria that are not indexed
by Alexa, thereby giving the developer power to do more sophisticated
searches. Developers can run regular expressions against the actual documents,
even when there are millions of them, to search for patterns and retrieve the
subset of documents that matched that regular expression. This application is
1The service has been deprecated for business reasons; however, the architecture and design
principles are still relevant.
18.5
GREPTHEWEB CASE STUDY
479


currently in production at Amazon.com and is code-named GrepTheWeb
because it can “grep” (a popular Unix command-line utility to search pat-
terns) the actual Web documents. GrepTheWeb allows developers to either
(a) perform specialized searches such as selecting documents that have a
particular HTML tag or META tag, (b) ﬁnd documents with particular
punctuations (“Hey!”, he said. “Why Wait?”), or (c) search for mathematical
equations (“f(x) 5 Px 1 W”), source code, e-mail addresses, or other pat-
terns such as “(dis)integration of life.”
The functionality is impressive, but even more impressive was GrepThe-
Web’s architecture and implementation. In the next section, you will zoom in to
see different levels of the architecture of GrepTheWeb.
18.5.1
Architecture
Figure 18.5 shows a high-level depiction of the architecture. The output of the
Million Search Results Service, which is a sorted list of links gzipped (com-
pressed using the Unix gzip utility) into a single ﬁle, is given to GrepTheWeb
as input. It takes a regular expression as a second input. It then returns a ﬁltered
subset of document links sorted and gzipped into a single ﬁle. Since the overall
process is asynchronous, developers can get the status of their jobs by calling
GetStatus() to see whether the execution is completed.
Matching a regular expression against millions of documents is not trivial.
Different factors could combine to cause the processing to take a lot of time:
 Regular expressions could be complex.
 Dataset could be large, even hundreds of terabytes.
 There could be unknown request patterns; for example, any number of
people can access the application at any given point in time.
Hence, the design goals of GrepTheWeb included the ability to scale in all
dimensions (more powerful pattern-matching languages, more concurrent users
Grep The Web
Application
RegEx
GetStatus
Subset of
document
Urls that
matched the
RegEx
Input dataset (List of Document Urls)
FIGURE 18.5. GrepTheWeb Architecture—Zoom Level 1.
480
BEST PRACTICES IN ARCHITECTING CLOUD APPLICATIONS IN THE AWS CLOUD


of common datasets, larger datasets, better result quality) while keeping the
costs of processing as low as possible.
The approach was to build an application that scales not only with demand,
but also without a heavy upfront investment and without the cost of maintaining
idle machines. To get a response in a reasonable amount of time, it was
important to distribute the job into multiple tasks and to perform a distributed
Grep operation that runs those tasks on multiple nodes in parallel.
Zooming in further, GrepTheWeb architecture is as shown in Figure 18.6. It
uses the following AWS components:
 Amazon S3. For retrieving input datasets and for storing the output
dataset.
 Amazon SQS. For durably buffering requests acting as a “glue” between
controllers.
 Amazon SimpleDB. For storing intermediate status, for storing log, and
for user data about tasks.
 Amazon EC2. For running a large distributed processing Hadoop cluster
on-demand.
 Hadoop. For distributed processing, automatic parallelization, and job
scheduling.
Manage phases
Launch, Monitor,
Shutdown
User info,
Job status info
Input
Output
Get Output
GetStatus
Amazon
SimpleDB
Amazon
EC2
Cluster
Amazon
S3
StartGrep
RegEx
Input Files
(Alexa Crawl)
Amazon
SQS
Controller
FIGURE 18.6. GrepTheWeb Architecture—Zoom Level 2.
18.5
GREPTHEWEB CASE STUDY
481


18.5.2
Workﬂow
GrepTheWeb is modular. It does its processing in four phases as shown in
Figure 18.7. The launch phase is responsible for validating and initiating the
processing of a GrepTheWeb request, instantiating Amazon EC2 instances,
launching the Hadoop cluster on them, and starting all the job processes. The
monitor phase is responsible for monitoring the EC2 cluster; it also maps,
reduces, and checks for success and failure. The shutdown phase is responsible
for billing and shutting down all Hadoop processes and Amazon EC2
instances, while the cleanup phase deletes Amazon SimpleDB transient data.
Detailed Workﬂow for Figure 18.8
1. On application start, queues are created if not already created and all
the controller threads are started. Each controller thread starts polling
their respective queues for any messages.
2. When a StartGrep user request is received, a launch message is
enqueued in the launch queue.
3. Launch Phase: Thelaunchcontrollerthreadpicksupthelaunchmessage,
executes the launch task, updates the status and timestamps in the
Amazon SimpleDB domain, enqueues a new message in the monitor
queue, and deletes the message from the launch queue after processing.
a. The launch task starts Amazon EC2 instances using a JRE pre-
installed AMI, deploys required Hadoop libraries, and starts a
Hadoop Job (run Map/Reduce tasks).
b. HadooprunsmaptasksonAmazonEC2slavenodesinparallel.Each
maptasktakesﬁles(multithreadedinbackground)fromAmazonS3,
runs a regular expression (Queue Message Attribute) against the ﬁle
from Amazon S3, and writes the match results along with a descrip-
tion of up to ﬁve matches locally, and then the combine/reduce task
combines and sorts the results and consolidates the output.
c. The ﬁnal results are stored on Amazon S3 in the output bucket.
4. Monitor Phase: The monitor controller thread picks up this message,
validates the status/error in Amazon SimpleDB, executes the monitor
task, updates the status in the Amazon SimpleDB domain, enqueues a
new message in the shutdown queue and billing queue, and deletes the
message from monitor queue after processing.
Launch
Phase
Monitor
Phase
Shutdown
Phase
Cleanup
Phase
FIGURE 18.7. Phases of GrepTheWeb architecture.
482
BEST PRACTICES IN ARCHITECTING CLOUD APPLICATIONS IN THE AWS CLOUD


a. The monitor task checks for the Hadoop status (JobTracker
success/failure) in regular intervals, and it updates the SimpleDB
items with status/error and Amazon S3 output ﬁle.
5. Shutdown Phase: The shutdown controller thread picks up this message
from the shutdown queue, executes the shutdown task, updates the status
and timestamps in Amazon SimpleDB domain, and deletes the message
fromthe shutdown queueafterprocessing.Likewise,thebillingcontroller
threadpicksupthemessagefromthebillingqueueandexecutesthebilling
task of sending usage information to the billing service.
a. The shutdown task kills the Hadoop processes, terminates the EC2
instances after getting EC2 topology information from Amazon
SimpleDB, and disposes of the infrastructure.
b. The billing task gets EC2 topology information, SimpleDB Box
Usage, and Amazon S3 ﬁle and query input and calculates the
billing and passes it to the billing service.
6. Cleanup Phase: Archives the SimpleDB data with user info.
7. Users can execute GetStatus on the service endpoint to get the status of
the overall system (all controllers and Hadoop) and download the
ﬁltered results from Amazon S3 after completion.
Launch
Queue
Monitor
Queue
Shutdown
Queue
Billing
Service
Billing
Queue
Launch
Controller
Master M
Slaves N
Put
File
Get
File
HDFS
Hadoop Cluster on
Amazon EC2
Amazon SimpleDB
Amazon S3
Shutdown
Check for results
Ping
Insert
Amazon EC2
info
Insert
JobID,
Status
Launch
Controller
Amazon SQS
Get EC2
Info
Monitor
Controller
Shutdown
Controller
Billing
Controller
Status
DB
Output
Input
FIGURE 18.8. GrepTheWeb Architecture—Zoom Level 3.
18.5
GREPTHEWEB CASE STUDY
483


18.5.3
Implementing Best Practices
In the next four subsections, you will see how GrepTheWeb implements the
best practices using different Amazon Web Services.
Elastic Storage Provided by Amazon S3. In GrepTheWeb, Amazon S3
acts as an input as well as an output data store. The input to GrepTheWeb is
the Web itself (compressed form of Alexa’s Web Crawl), stored on Amazon S3
as objects and updated frequently. Because the Web Crawl dataset can be huge
(usually in terabytes) and always growing, there was a need for a distributed,
elastic, persistent storage. Amazon S3 proved to be a perfect ﬁt.
Loose Coupling Using Amazon SQS. Amazon SQS was used as message-
passing mechanism between components. It acts as “glue” that wired different
functional components together. This not only helped in making the different
components loosely coupled, but also helped in building an overall more failure
resilient system.
Buffer. If one component is receiving and processing requests faster than other
components (an unbalanced producer consumer situation), buffering will help
make the overall system more resilient to bursts of trafﬁc (or load). Amazon
SQS acts as a transient buffer between two components (controllers) of the
GrepTheWeb system. If a message is sent directly to a component, the receiver
will need to consume it at a rate dictated by the sender. For example, if the
billing system was slow or if the launch time of the Hadoop cluster was more
than expected, the overall system would slow down, because it would just have
to wait. With message queues, sender and receiver are decoupled and the queue
service smooths out any “spiky” message trafﬁc.
Isolation. Interaction between any two controllers in GrepTheWeb is through
messages in the queue, and no controller directly calls any other controller. All
communication and interaction happens by storing messages in the queue
(en-queue) and retrieving messages from the queue (de-queue). This makes the
entire system loosely coupled and makes the interfaces simple and clean.
Amazon SQS provided a uniform way of transferring information between
the different application components. Each controller’s function is to retrieve the
message, process the message (execute the function), and store the message in
another queue while they are completely isolated from others.
Asynchrony. Because it was difﬁcult to know how much time each phase
would take to execute (e.g., the launch phase decides dynamically how many
instances need to start based on the request and hence execution time is
unknown), Amazon SQS helped by making the system behave in an
484
BEST PRACTICES IN ARCHITECTING CLOUD APPLICATIONS IN THE AWS CLOUD


asynchronous fashion. Now, if the launch phase takes more time to process or
the monitor phase fails, the other components of the system are not affected
and the overall system is more stable and highly available.
Storing Statuses in Amazon SimpleDB. One use for a database in cloud
applications is to track statuses. Since the components of the system run
asynchronously, there is a need to obtain the status of the system at any given
point in time. Moreover, since all components are autonomous and discrete,
there is a need for a query-able data store that captures the state of the system.
Because Amazon SimpleDB is schema-less, there is no need to deﬁne the
structure of a record beforehand. Every controller can deﬁne its own structure
and append data to a “job” item. For example: For a given job, “run email
address regex over 10 million documents,” the launch controller will add/
update the “launch_status” attribute along with the “launch_starttime,” while
the monitor controller will add/update the “monitor_status” and “hadoop_
status” attributes with enumeration values (running, completed, error, none). A
GetStatus() call will query Amazon SimpleDB and return the state of each
controller and also the overall status of the system.
Component services can query Amazon SimpleDB anytime because
controllers independently store their states—one more nice way to create
asynchronous highly available services. Although a simplistic approach was
used in implementing the use of Amazon SimpleDB in GrepTheWeb, a more
sophisticated approach, where there was complete, almost real-time monitor-
ing, would also be possible—For example, storing the Hadoop JobTracker
status to show how many maps have been performed at a given moment.
Amazon SimpleDB is also used to store active Request IDs for historical and
auditing/billing purposes.
In summary, Amazon SimpleDB is used as a status database to store the
different states of the components and a historical/log database for querying
high-performance data.
Intelligent Elasticity Implemented Using Amazon EC2. In GrepTheWeb,
the controller code runs on Amazon EC2 instances. The launch controller
spawns master and slave instances using a preconﬁgured Amazon machine
image (AMI). Since the dynamic provisioning and decommissioning happens
using simple Web service calls, GrepTheWeb knows how many master and
slave instances need to be launched.
The launch controller makes an educated guess, based on reservation logic,
of how many slaves are needed to perform a particular job. The reservation
logic is based on the complexity of the query (number of predicates, etc.) and
the size of the input dataset (number of documents to be searched). This was
also kept conﬁgurable so that overall processing time can be reduced by simply
specifying the number of instances to launch. After launching the instances and
starting the Hadoop cluster on those instances, Hadoop will appoint a master
18.5
GREPTHEWEB CASE STUDY
485


and slaves, handles the negotiating, handshaking, and security token distribu-
tion (SSH keys, certiﬁcates), and runs the grep job.
18.5.4
GrepTheWeb Hadoop implementation
Hadoop is an open source distributed processing framework that allows
computation of large datasets by splitting the dataset into manageable chunks,
spreading it across a ﬂeet of machines and managing the overall process by
launching jobs, processing the job no matter where the data are physically
located and, at the end, aggregating the job output into a ﬁnal result.
Hadoop is a good ﬁt for the GrepTheWeb application. Because each grep
task can be run in parallel independently of other grep tasks, using the parallel
approach embodied in Hadoop is a perfect ﬁt.
For GrepTheWeb, the actual documents (the web) are crawled ahead of time
and stored on Amazon S3. Each user starts a grep job by calling the StartGrep
function at the service endpoint. When triggered, masters and slave nodes
(Hadoop cluster) are started on Amazon EC2 instances. Hadoop splits the input
(document with pointers to Amazon S3 objects) into multiple manageable
chunks of 100 lines each and assign the chunk to a slave node to run the map
task [61]. The map task reads these lines and is responsible for fetching the ﬁles
from Amazon S3, running the regular expression on them and writing the results
locally. If there is no match, there is no output. The map tasks then passes the
results to the reduce phase, which is an identity function (pass through) to
aggregate all the outputs. The “ﬁnal” output is written back to Amazon S3.
18.6
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
The day is not too far when applications will cease to be aware of physical
hardware. Much like plugging in a microwave in order to power it doesn’t
require any knowledge of electricity, one should be able to plug in an
Example
Regular Expression
“A(.*)zon”
Format of the line in the Input dataset
[URL]  [Title]  [charset]  [size]  [S3 Object Key of .gz file] [offset]
http://www.amazon.com/gp/browse.html?node=3435361      Amazon Web      us-ascii      3509
            /2008/01/08/51/1/51_1_20080108072442_crawl100.arc.gz      70150864
Mapper Implementation
Key = line number and value = line in the input dataset
Create a signed URL (using Amazon AWS credentials) using the contents of key-value
Read (fetch) Amazon S3 Object (file) into a buffer
Run regular expression on that buffer
If there is match, collect the output in new set of key-value pairs (key = line, value = up to 5 matches)
Reducer Implementation Pass-through (Built-in Identity Function) and write the results back to S3.
FIGURE 18.9. Map reduce operation (in GrepTheWeb).
486
BEST PRACTICES IN ARCHITECTING CLOUD APPLICATIONS IN THE AWS CLOUD


application to the cloud in order to receive the power it needs to run, just like a
utility. As an architect, you will manage abstract compute, storage, and
network resources instead of physical servers. Applications will continue to
function even if the underlying physical hardware fails or is removed or
replaced. Applications will adapt themselves to ﬂuctuating demand patterns
by deploying resources instantaneously and automatically, thereby achieving
highest utilization levels at all times. Scalability, security, high availability,
fault-tolerance, testability, and elasticity will be conﬁgurable properties of
the application architecture and will be an automated and intrinsic part of the
platform on which they are built.
However, we are not there yet. Today, you can build applications in the
cloud with some of these qualities by implementing the best practices high-
lighted in the chapter. Best practices in cloud computing architectures will
continue to evolve, and as researchers we should focus not only on enhancing
the cloud but also on building tools, technologies, and processes that will make
it easier for developers and architects to plug in applications to the cloud easily.
18.7
CONCLUSION
This chapter has provided prescriptive guidance to cloud architects for
designing efﬁcient cloud applications.
By focusing on concepts and best practices—like designing for failure,
decoupling the application components, understanding and implementing
elasticity, combining it with parallelization, and integrating security in every
aspect of the application architecture—cloud architects can understand the
design considerations necessary for building highly scalable cloud applications.
The GrepTheWeb architecture epitomizes how highly scalable architectures
are built in the cloud today. The AWS cloud offers highly reliable pay-as-you-
go infrastructure services. The AWS-speciﬁc tactics highlighted in the chapter
will help design cloud applications using these services. As a researcher, it is
advised that you play with these commercial services, learn from the work of
others, build on the top, and enhance and further invent cloud computing.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author is profoundly grateful to Jeff Barr, Steve Riley, Paul Horvath,
Prashant Sridharan, and Scot Marvin for providing comments on early drafts
of this chapter. Special thanks to Matt Tavis for providing valuable insight.
Without his contributions, the chapter would not have been possible.
REFERENCES
1.
J.
Varia,
Cloud
Architectures,
http://jineshvaria.s3.amazonaws.com/public/
cloudarchitectures-varia.pdf, 2007-07-01.
REFERENCES
487


2.
Amazon EC2 Detail Page, http://aws.amazon.com/ec2.
3.
Amazon CloudWatch Detail Page, http://aws.amazon.com/cloudwatch/
4.
Auto-scaling feature, http://aws.amazon.com/auto-scaling
5.
Elastic Load Balancing feature, http://aws.amazon.com/elasticloadbalancing
6.
Elastic Block Store, http://aws.amazon.com/ebs
7.
Amazon S3, http://aws.amazon.com/s3
8.
Amazon CloudFront, http://aws.amazon.com/cloudfront
9.
Amazon SimpleDB, http://aws.amazon.com/simpledb
10.
Amazon RDS, http://aws.amazon.com/rds
11.
Amazon SQS, http://aws.amazon.com/sqs
12.
Amazon ElasticMapReduce, http://aws.amazon.com/elasticmapreduce and Ama-
zon Simple Notiﬁcation Services (Amazon SNS)
13.
Amazon Virtual Private Cloud, http://aws.amazon.com/vpc
14.
Amazon Flexible Payments Service, http://aws.amazon.com/fps and Amazon
DevPay, http://aws.amazon.com/devpay
15.
T. Schlossnagle, Scalable Internet Architectures, Sams Publishing, 2006-07-31.
16.
Wikipedia Article, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slashdot_effect
17.
Memcached Web site, http://www.danga.com/memcached/
18.
D. Pritchett, Shard Lessons, http://www.addsimplicity.com/adding_simplicity_
an_engi/2008/08/shard-lessons.html, 2008-08-24.
19.
J. Hamilton, On designing and deploying Internet-scale services, 2007, in 21st
Large Installation System Administration conference (LISA ’O7), http://mvdirona.
com/jrh/talksAndPapers/JamesRH_Lisa.pdf
20.
D. Obasanjo, Building Scalable Databases: Pros and Cons of Various Database
Sharding Schemes, http://www.25hoursaday.com/weblog/2009/01/16/BuildingSca-
lableDatabasesProsAndConsOfVariousDatabaseShardingSchemes.aspx, 2009-01-16.
21.
M. Lurie, The Federation: Database Interoperability, http://www.ibm.com/
developerworks/data/library/techarticle/0304lurie/0304lurie.html, 2003-04-23.
22.
Amazon SQS Team, Building Scalable, Reliable Amazon EC2 Applications with
Amazon SQS, http://sqs-public-images.s3.amazonaws.com/Building_Scalabale_
EC2_applications_with_SQS2.pdf, 2008.
23.
Chef, http://wiki.opscode.com/display/chef/Home
24.
Puppet, http://reductivelabs.com/trac/puppet/
25.
CFEngine, http://www.cfengine.org/
26.
Genome, http://genome.et.redhat.com/
27.
Wikipedia Article, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Just_enough_operating_system
28.
Instance metadata and userdata, http://docs.amazonwebservices.com/AWSEC2/
latest/DeveloperGuide/index.html?AESDG-chapter-instancedata.html
29.
Boot From Amazon EBS feature, http://developer.amazonwebservices.com/con-
nect/entry.jspa?externalID 5 3121
30.
How to Share a Snapshot section, http://aws.amazon.com/ebs/
31.
Hadoop website, http://hadoop.apache.org/
32.
Amazon S3 Team, Amazon S3 Error Best Practices, http://docs.amazonwebservices
.com/AmazonS3/latest/index.html?ErrorBestPractices.html, 2006-03-01.
488
BEST PRACTICES IN ARCHITECTING CLOUD APPLICATIONS IN THE AWS CLOUD


33.
Amazon SimpleDB Team, Query 201: Tips and Tricks for Amazon SimpleDB
Query, http://developer.amazonwebservices.com/connect/entry.jspa?externalID 5
1232&categoryID 5 176, 2008-02-07.
34.
Amazon SimpleDB Team, Building for Performance and Reliability with Amazon
SimpleDB, http://developer.amazonwebservices.com/connect/entry.jspa?externalID5
1394&categoryID5 176, 2008-04-11.
35.
Amazon SimpleDB Team, Query 101: Building Amazon SimpleDB Queries,
http://developer.amazonwebservices.com/connect/entry.jspa?externalID 5 1231&
categoryID 5 176, 2008-02-07.
36.
Amazon Import Export Services, http://aws.amazon.com/importexport
37.
Wikipedia Article, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sneakernet
38.
Amazon Security Team, Overview of Security Processes, http://awsmedia.s3
.amazonaws.com/pdf/AWS_Security_Whitepaper.pdf, 2009-06-01.
39.
Verisign SSL, http://www.verisign.com/ssl/
40.
EnTrust SSL, http://www.entrust.net/ssl-products.htm
41.
E. Hammond, Escaping Restrictive/Untrusted Networks with OpenVPN on EC2,
http://alestic.com/2009/05/openvpn-ec2, 2009-05-02.
42.
GNUPG, http://www.gnupg.org
43.
PGP, http://www.pgp.com/
44.
Amazon
Web
Services
Team,
Creating
HIPPA-Compliant
Medical
Data
Applications
with
AWS,
http://awsmedia.s3.amazonaws.com/AWS_HIPAA_
Whitepaper_Final.pdf, 2009-04-01.
45.
R. Bragg, The Encrypting File System, http://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/library/
cc700811.aspx, 2009.
46.
Microsoft Support Team, Best Practices For Encrypting File System (Windows),
http://support.microsoft.com/kb/223316, 2009.
47.
TrueCrypt, http://www.truecrypt.org/
48.
EnCFS, http://www.arg0.net/encfs
49.
AES, http://loop-aes.sourceforge.net/loop-AES.README
50.
DM-Crypt, http://www.saout.de/misc/dm-crypt/
51.
TrueCrypt, http://www.truecrypt.org/
52.
ZFS ﬁlesystem, http://www.opensolaris.org/os/community/zfs/
53.
Solaris Security Team, ZFS Encryption Project (OpenSolaris), http://www.open-
solaris.org/os/project/zfs-crypto/, 2009-05-01.
54.
S. Swidler, How to keep your AWS credentials on an EC2 instance securely, http://
clouddevelopertips.blogspot.com/2009/08/how-to-keep-your-aws-credentials-on-
ec2.html, 2009-08-31.
55.
AWS announcement, http://aws.amazon.com/about-aws/whats-new/2009/08/31/
seamlessly-rotate-your-access-credentials/
56.
Multi-factor Authentication, http://aws.amazon.com/mfa/
57.
AWS Management Console, http://aws.amazon.com/console/
58.
Amazon EC2 User Guide, Security Group description, http://docs.amazonwebser-
vices.com/AWSEC2/2009-07-15/UserGuide/index.html?using-network-security.html
59.
Microsoft Windows Firewall, http://technet.microsoft.com/en-us/library/cc779199
(WS.10).aspx, March 2003
REFERENCES
489


60.
Netﬁlter Website, http://www.netﬁlter.org/
61.
Hadoop Map/Reduce Tutorial, The Apache Software foundation, http://hadoop
.apache.org/common/docs/ro.19.2./mapred_tutorial.html, 2008
62.
Amazon S3 Team, Best Practices for using Amazon S3, http://developer.amazon-
webservices.com/connect/entry.jspa?externalID 5 1904, 2008-11-26.
490
BEST PRACTICES IN ARCHITECTING CLOUD APPLICATIONS IN THE AWS CLOUD


CHAPTER 19
MASSIVELY MULTIPLAYER ONLINE
GAME HOSTING ON CLOUD
RESOURCES
VLAD NAE, RADU PRODAN, and ALEXANDRU IOSUP
19.1
INTRODUCTION
Massively Multiplayer On-Line Games (MMOGs) have emerged in the past
decade as a new type of large-scale distributed application characterized by a
huge real-time virtual world entertaining millions of players spread across the
globe. Today’s MMOGs operate as clientserver architectures, in which
the game server simulates a world via computing and database operations,
receives and processes commands from the clients, and interoperates with a
billing and accounting system [1, 2]. Based on the actions submitted by the
players, the game servers compute the global state of the game world represented
by the position and interactions of the entities, and they send appropriate real-
time responses to the players containing the new relevant state information.
Depending on the game, typical response times to ensure ﬂuent play must be
between 100 msec in on-line First Person Shooter (FPS) action games and 12 sec
for Role-Playing Games (RPG). A good game experience is critical in keeping the
players engaged, and it has an immediate consequence on the income of the
MMOG operators. Failing to deliver timely simulation updates leads to a
degraded game experience and triggers player departure.
To support thousands of concurrent players and many more other game
entities, MMOG operators install and operate a large static infrastructure
consisting of hundreds to thousands of computers onto which they distribute
the load of a game in order to provide the required quality of service. For
example, the operating infrastructure of the Massively Multiplayer On-Line
Cloud Computing: Principles and Paradigms,
Edited by Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg and
Andrzej Goscinski
Copyright r 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
491


Role-Playing Game (MMORPG) World of Warcraft,1 has over 10,000 compu-
ters. In an earlier study [3] we demonstrated that the resource demand of
MMOGs is highly dynamic and thus a large portion of the statically allocated
resources is unnecessary, which leads to a very inefﬁcient resource utilization. In
addition, this enterprise limitation has negative economic impacts by preventing
any but the largest hosting centers from joining the market; this dramatically
increases prices, because those centers must be capable of handling peaks in
demand, even if the resources are not needed for much of the time.
In this chapter we propose a new MMOG ecosystem consisting of a game
operator responsible for the management of a distributed game session and
multiple data centers providing virtualized resources required for running the
session. This new model extends our previous work based on the assumption
that the software that implements the game servers is pre-deployed and
installed on the data center machines based on off-line agreements (signed
beforehand) between the game operators and the hosting data centers. This
approach has an obvious limitation if the game operator underestimates the
success of its MMOG (such a scenario did happen in reality, causing huge
economic losses) and the load of a game session exceeds the capacities of the
data centers with which the operator has signed off-line leasing agreements.
We plan to address this limitation by applying cloud computing principles,
which emerged in the recent years as a hot topic that promises a cheap
alternative to supercomputers and expensive specialized data centers. Through
the concept of virtualization, compute clouds provide generic functionality for
on-demand hosting and provisioning of computing resources capable of
running nearly any kind of application, including MMOGs. Aggregating in
theory an unbounded number of resources from a large number of different
providers, compute clouds have the potential to eliminate the scalability
barriers in MMOG hosting through a novel concept of “scaling by credit
card,” where the only limits are imposed by the ﬁnancial reasons, as opposed to
the physical data center limitations of today.
In the next section we introduce some more background information on
MMOG and resource virtualization. Section 19.3 surveys the most relevant
related work. In Section 19.4 we describe the MMOG application hosting,
operation, and virtualization models used by our enhanced MMOG ecosystem.
In Section 19.5 we study the impact of using virtualized resources for running
single and multiple MMOG sessions using different MMOG hosting and
operation policies, and Section 19.7 describes the conclusions we have reached.
19.2
BACKGROUND
In this section we introduce a few background concepts on MMOG and
virtualizationrequiredforabetterpositioningandunderstandingofourapproach.
1Blizzard Entertainment, Inc., World Of Warcraft, http://www.worldofwarcraft.com/.
492
MASSIVELY MULTIPLAYER ONLINE GAME HOSTING ON CLOUD RESOURCES


19.2.1
MMOG
On-line entertainment including gaming is a huge growth sector worldwide.
MMOGs grew from 10,000 subscribers in 1997 to 6.7 million in 2003, and the
rate is accelerating to an estimated 60 million people by 2011. The release of
World of Warcraft in 2005 saw a single game break the barrier of 4 million
subscribers worldwide. The market size shows equally impressive numbers,
estimated by the Entertainment Software Association (ESA) to 7 billion USD
with an avid growth over 300% in the last 10 years. In comparison, the Motion
Picture Association of America (MPAA) reports a size of 8.99 billion USD and
the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) reports a size of 12.3
billion USD, which stagnated (and even decreased by 2%) in the last 10 years.
It is therefore expected that the game industry will soon grow larger than both
movie and music market sizes.
The relative success of each game is characterized by the number of
registered players. Figure 19.1 displays the number of MMORPG players
over time for the U.S. and European markets based on the survey of Wood-
cock2 for dates until June 2006 and then based on our own research afterwards.
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
20.0
22.5
25.0
1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
Number of Players [Millions]
Date
The Realm Online
Ultima Online
Lineage
EverQuest
Asheron’s Call
Anarchy Online
World War II Online
Majestic
Dark Age of Camelot
Motor City Online
Tibia
RuneScape
Final Fantasy XI
Earth Beyond
Asheron’s Call 2
The Sims Online
There
A Tale in the Desert
EverQuest Online Adventures
Shadowbane
Mankind
Eve Online
PlanetSide
Toontown Online
Second Life
Star Wars Galaxies
Lineage II
Sphere
Puzzle Pirates
Horizons
Era of Eidolon
City of Heroes/Villains
Dofus
EverQuest II
World of Warcraft
The Matrix Online
Dungeons Dragons Online
Auto Assault
Guild Wars
All
FIGURE 19.1. Number of MMORPG players over time.
2B. S. Woodcock, An Analysis of MMOG Subscription Growth, 2008, http://www.mmogchart.com/.
19.2
BACKGROUND
493


The chart shows that there are currently six games with more than 500,000
players each. The total number of MMORPG players is well-approximated by
the exponential trend αUeβUx, where α 5 7 3 10 2 9 and β 5 0.028 give a
Pearson’s coefﬁcient of determination R2 5 0.974. Assuming the same rate of
growth, we can estimate over 60 million players by 2011 in the U.S. and EU
markets alone. The large number of MMOG players for each title, as well as for
the MMOG ecosystem as a whole, is one main motivation for our work.
19.2.2
Virtualization
Similar to many types of scientiﬁc computing software, MMOG are imple-
mented in the C language with lots of low-level library dependencies that
makes the deployment and installation process a hard problem that requires
manual intervention. In this context, virtualization is a key technology for
hiding from the users the low-level physical characteristics of a computing
platform by showing another abstract, higher-level emulated platform instead
represented by a so-called virtual machine (VM). The two most common
virtualization environments today are [4] VMWare and Xen [5], and there
exist other solutions used by smaller communities such as Oceano, VMPlants,
Kadeploy, Shirako, VW, XGE, VD caches, KVM, Virtual Box, vsersers,
OpenVZ, and Qemu. Although the new virtualization layer adds a certain
degree of overheads (that we will model in Section 19.4.4), the time for
creating one VM image embedding the required software is relatively constant
and can be automatically deployed on all supported platforms. This process
ensures deployment and provisioning scalability that represents a signiﬁcant
beneﬁt.
The largest part of the scientiﬁc community, including Amazon, has chosen
Xen as their virtualization platform as it is open source and, therefore, can be
freely used and adapted to various needs, if required. The advantages of
virtualization are rather important when using heterogeneous computing
resources. A VM image only needs to be created once and then used on all
machines having the same virtualization software installed.
19.3
RELATED WORK
There have been a number of research activities in assessing the performance of
virtualized resources in cloud computing environments and in general [613].
In contrast to these studies, ours targets computational cloud resources for a
new application class (MMOG).
Close to our work is the seminal study of Amazon S3 [8], which includes an
evaluation of ﬁle transfer between Amazon EC2 and S3. Several other small-
scale performance studies of Amazon EC2 have been recently conducted such
as the study of Amazon EC2 performance using the NPB benchmark suite [9]
and the early comparative study of Eucalyptus and EC2 performance [13]. Our
494
MASSIVELY MULTIPLAYER ONLINE GAME HOSTING ON CLOUD RESOURCES


work complements these studies by proposing a detailed analytical model for
VM instantiation overheads by analyzing the services offered multiple cloud
providers.
In Deelman et al. [7], the authors perform a performance and cost study of
executing a scientiﬁc astronomy workﬂow on simulated Amazon EC2 and S3
resources. They proved that by provisioning the right amount of storage and
compute resources, cost can be signiﬁcantly reduced with no signiﬁcant impact
on application performance. Our work focused on another application class
and provides a more ﬁne-grained VM instantiation overhead breakdown by
considering multiple cloud providers (not restricted to Amazon EC2).
The Globus project studied different scheduling strategies that allow the
integration of VM management into batch execution systems like PBS
[14]. The virtualization features such as suspend, migrate, and resume allow
new scheduling strategies which can be used in future grid or cloud
environments [13].
Aneka [15] is a.NET-based service-oriented platform for desktop grid
computing that provides (a) a conﬁgurable service container hosting, (b)
pluggable services for discovering, scheduling, and balancing various types of
workloads, and (c) a ﬂexible and extensible API supporting various pro-
gramming models including threading, batch processing, MPI, and dataﬂow.
The work in [16] targets interconnecting clouds for dynamically creating an
atmospheric computing environment and describes a meta-negotiation infra-
structure to establish global cloud exchanges and markets. Recent work [17]
describes an approach of extending a local cluster by cloud resources using two
schedulers: one for the cluster and one for the cloud, using different strategies.
The possible beneﬁt of not violating deadlines and higher throughput of the
cluster is analyzed.
The EGEE project released an interesting report comparing the Amazon
EC2 and S3 services with the EGEE grid infrastructure [18]. Three interesting
aspects about cost and functionality are compared, with the conclusion that for
long-lasting large-scale experiments, such as those conducted for the LHC,
cloud services would be too expensive compared to the computing center
resources owned by the project members.
19.4
MODEL
We model a platform for a MMOG ecosystem consisting of a global network of
conventional data centers complemented by a set of virtualized cloud comput-
ing providers that host in cooperation one MMOG session. An MMOG session
is managed by one game operator that is responsible for the real-time
experience of the connected players and which negotiates with existing data
center and cloud providers the necessary resources in order to achieve this goal.
Our multi-data center model extends on related work limited to Web services
and single data centers [1923].
19.4
MODEL
495


19.4.1
Application
MMOGs are large-scale simulations of persistent game worlds comprising
various objects or entities such as avatars (in-game representation of the
players), bots or nonplayer characters (mobile entities that have the ability to
act independently), movable objects (passive entities such as boxes or guns
which can be manipulated but do not initiate interactions), and immutable
entities or decor.
The mostly employed architectural model for MMOGs is client/server [1],
with game operators maintaining the servers that simulate a distributed game
world. The clients dynamically connect to a joint game session and interact with
each other by sending play actions such as movements, shootings, operations
on game objects, or chat. The vast majority of game servers follow a similar
computational model implementing an inﬁnite loop, where in each loop
iteration (also called tick) there are certain steps to be performed such as
processing events coming from the connected clients and other servers, processing
the states of the active entities, and broadcasting state update to the connected
clients at a required rate. To accommodate the thousands of concurrent
players into one single MMOG session, the current practice is to parallelize
it and distribute the load across multiple resources using several parallelization
techniques.
Spatial scaling of a game session is achieved through a conventional
parallelization technique called zoning, based on similar data locality concepts
as in scientiﬁc parallel processing (see Figure 19.2). Zoning is currently
Game Operator #2
Game Operator #1
Hoster #1
Hoster #2
MMOG Load Prediction
MMOG Load Prediction
Resource Allocation
Resource Allocation
MMOG #1
MMOG #2
Active entity (player)
Shadow entity (player)
Server
Legend:
Replication
Zoning
FIGURE 19.2. The MMOG ecosystem architecture.
496
MASSIVELY MULTIPLAYER ONLINE GAME HOSTING ON CLOUD RESOURCES


being applied on MMORPGs (World of Warcraft)3 by partitioning of the game
world into zones to be handled independently by separate machines. In
production MMORPGs, zones are typically predeﬁned static geographical
areas, where the transition among zones can only happen through certain
portals such as special doors or teleportation.
The second technique, called replication (see Figure 19.2), targets paralleli-
zation of game sessions with a large density of players located and interacting
within each other’s proximity. Such situations are typical for fast-paced FPS
games in which players gather in certain hotspot action areas that congest game
servers that are no longer capable of delivering state updates at the required
rate. To address this problem, replication deﬁnes a novel method of distributing
load by replicating the same game zone on several machines and distribut-
ing the entities. Each server computes the state for a subset of entities called
active entities, while the remaining ones, called shadow entities (which are
active in the other participating servers), are synchronized across servers.
The third parallelization technique, called instancing, is a simpliﬁcation of
replication which distributes the session load by starting multiple instances
of widely populated zones. The instances are completely independent of each
other, meaning that two entities from different instances will not see each other,
even if located at the same coordinates.
19.4.2
Hosting
The novel enhanced hosting model introduced in this article consists of
conventional data centers that operate pre-installed game servers [3] and
additional general purpose providers of virtualized cloud resources (see Figure
19.2). In the remainder of the chapter, we will refer to both types of resource
providers as hosters.
We consider the hosting platform as consisting of hosters (data centers and
cloud providers) scattered around the world, where each hoster pools together
resources that may serve several games simultaneously (see Figure 19.2). The
hosters operate two major services. A load prediction service, presented in detail
in Nae et al. [24], is in charge of projecting the future distribution of entities in
the game world that is demonstrated to have the highest impact on the server
load. We devised accurate analytical models for translating the entity distribu-
tion prediction and possible interactions into estimating the game server load.
Based on the projected load, a resource allocation service [3] provisions
additional local servers to the game session (through the zoning, replication,
or instancing) that accommodate the player load while guaranteeing the real-
time quality of service. For example, by timely foreseeing critical hot spots (i.e.,
excessively populated area of interest generating a large number of interac-
tions), one can dynamically provision additional servers on some new resources
3MMORPG.COM, Your Headquarters for Massive Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Games.
http://www.mmorpg.com/
19.4
MODEL
497


and take timely load balancing actions that transparently redistribute the game
load before the servers become overloaded.
Our hosting model considers the size and duration of the minimal resource
allocation which may be not only for a resource as a whole (e.g., a server in
Web data centers [9] or a processor in a grid system), but also for a fraction of
that resource (e.g., a virtual machine running on a physical node [25], or a
channel of an optical network). The minimal duration for which a resource may
be allocated may be between a few seconds (servicing one user request by a Web
service) and several months (a typical value for Web server hosting). We deﬁne
the resource bulk as the minimum number of resources that can be allocated for
one request, expressed as the multiple of a minimal resource size. Similarly, we
deﬁne the time bulk as the minimum duration for which a resource allocation
can be performed expressed as multiple of a minimal time period. A hoster may
choose to allocate resources for MMOGs only in bulks under a certain
spacetime hosting policy.
19.4.3
Operation
A game operator can handle simultaneously multiple MMOG sessions of different
genres, designs with different interactivity types and counts, and different latency
tolerance. Based on the exhibited game load, the operator submits resource
requests to the hosters by specifying the type, number, and duration for which
the resources are desired (either statically or dynamically computed), and the
hosters respond with offers based on their local timespace renting policy. We
currently consider four resource types that are relevant for MMOG hosting: CPU,
memory, input from the external network (Ext[in]), and output to the external
network (Ext[out]) of a data center.
Depending on the hoster’s service model (either best-effort or advance
reservation-based), resource requests are queued or immediately ﬁtted in the
schedule, respectively. Using one or several important metrics (e.g., virtualiza-
tion overheads, geographical proximity, data locality, resource proportiona-
lity), the game operator applies a resource selection policy using one or several
of the following ordering mechanisms:
 Classifying groups several resources into classes based on metric value
ranges.
 Sorting orders the resources based on the metric values.
 Filtering eliminates the resources with inadequate metric values.
 Prioritizing gives higher allocation priority to resources with important
metric values.
Once the available resources are selected, they are allocated to the game
operators. From the game operator’s point of view, we say that the resources
have been provisioned. From here on, we use the terms resource allocation and
498
MASSIVELY MULTIPLAYER ONLINE GAME HOSTING ON CLOUD RESOURCES


resource provisioning interchangeably. The allocated resources are reserved for
executing the MMOG servers for the entire duration of the game operator’s
request.
19.4.4
Virtualization Model
VM instantiation is the process by which a VM is started on a selected resource.
A heavy VM behaves as a full operating system and middleware stack, as
opposed to a light VM that only installs a minimal control and communication
layer on top of the existing operating system and middleware stack. For
example, a VMware or Xen deployment is a heavy VM, while a Condor glide-in
deployment is a light VM. In this section we present a model for the
instantiation of a heavy VM on a cloud resource.
This section presents a model for VM instantiation that considers four
performance aspects expressed by the corresponding virtualization overheads:
VM image preparation tc, VM transfer tx,VM start ts, and VM removal tr.
Performance-wise, the total time needed to instantiate a VM can be expressed as
T 5 tc 1 tx 1 ts 1 tr
Conventional data centers do not exhibit this overhead, but are restricted to
pre-deployed software that lack the ﬂexibility of dynamic provisioning and on-
the-ﬂy deployment of MMOG servers. We detail these observed overheads in
the remainder of this section.
We distinguish two models for VM instantiation:
 VMI-Plain, where a VM suspension/resume is not allowed
 VMI-SR, where a VM suspend/resume is allowed
The main differences between these two models are that tc and ts are,
respectively, higher and lower for VMI-SR than for VMI-Plain and that
VMI-SR enables VM migration across (identical) resources. The suspension/
resume mechanism is worthwhile when the user submits jobs that require the
same VM and the size of the required VM is small. For both models, the images
are stored uncompressed.
For the VMI-Plain image preparation, VM images are pre-created, but they
can be extensively conﬁgured. For VMI-SR, VM image creation follows the
same process as for VMI-Plain the ﬁrst time a VM is created; afterwards,
the VM is only suspended/resumed. We model the VM image preparation as
follows:
tc 5
0;
tsuspend;
timage;
VM pre-created or cached;
VM to be suspended;
on-the-fly image creation and=or configuration
8
<
:
19.4
MODEL
499


where tsuspend 5 f(size(VMmem)) and VMmem is the memory size of the
instantiated VM (RAM and disk).
For the VM transfer, our model considers (a) the minimal time necessary to
transfer one uncompressed VM image and the conﬁguration scripts and (b) a
small transfer overhead due to non-overlapping transfers for N VMs. For VMI-
SR, a VM that is migrated adds the VM transfer cost to the cost of suspension.
We formally express the VM transfer time as
tx 5
0;
tz
x 1 tc
x 1 tu
x;
tc
x;
VM already present;
VM zipped; copied; and unzipped;
VM is copied as is
8
<
:
where tz
x 5 f ðsizeðVMimageÞÞ is the time for zipping a VM, tc
x 5 f xðsizeðVMimage;
jVMinstancesjÞÞ is the time for transferring the VM, and tu
x 5 f uðsizeðVMimageÞ is
the time for unzipping the image.
For the VM start, our model accounts for both the time to boot the VM and
the time to locally conﬁgure the VM:
tc 5
0;
tresume;
tboot 1 tcfg;
VM used by the same user with the same configuration;
VM to be resumed ðif suspendedÞ;
otherwise
8
<
:
where tresume 5 f(size(VMmemory)) and VMmemory is the size of the instantiated
VM’s memory (RAM and disk).
Finally, we deﬁne the time to remove a VM as follows:
tr 5
0;
tstop;
tcleanup;
VM is used by the same user with the same configuration;
VM stops with no removal necessary;
VM removal necessary;
8
<
:
Table 19.1 reports the modeled parameter values under the assumption that at
most 10 VMs are started on the same physical machine.
19.5
EXPERIMENTS
19.5.1
Setup
We performed experiments using traces from a real MMOG called Rune-
Scape4, ranked second by number of players in the U.S. and European markets
(see Figure 19.1). RuneScape is not a traditional MMORPG, but combines
elements of RPG and FPS (and other genres) in speciﬁc parts of the game world
4Jagex, Ltd. RuneScape. The massive online adventure game. http://www.runescape.com/
500
MASSIVELY MULTIPLAYER ONLINE GAME HOSTING ON CLOUD RESOURCES


TABLE 19.1. Realistic Parameter Values for the Heavy VM Instantiation Modela
VM
Image Creation
Transfer
Start
Removal
Oceano
0 (pre-created)
0 (present)
tboot 1 tcfg 5 130
n/a
VMPlants
timage 5 27 1 100 U S
tx 1 ts 5 90 1 80 U S
n/a
Kadeploy
0 (pre-created)
tx 1 ts 5 200 1 0.33 U N
tc/up 5 0.2 U N
Shirako
timage 1 tz
x 5 100s; tcz
x 1 tu
x 1 ts 5 20 1 2 U N
n/a
VW
0 (pre-created)
tx 1 ts 5 110 1 54 U N
n/a
XGE
tsuspend 5 15 1 22.5 U S
n/a
tresume 5 20 1 18.3 U S
n/a
VD caches
tc 1 tx 5 248 1 0.09 U S
n/a
n/a
VMI-Plain
tc 5 5 (conﬁg. only)
tx 5 Xfer(S) 1 0.09 U N
tboot 1 tcfg 5 180
tstop 5 10
VMI-SR
tsuspend 5 20 1 25 U S
tx 5 Xfer(S) 1 0.09 U N
tresume 5 20 1 20 U S
tstop 5 10
aMeasured in Seconds, where S is the size of the data to transfer in gigabytes, N is the number of VMs to instantiate, and Xfer(S) is the transfer time for data of
size S from the data source to the resource that instantiates the VM (e.g., Xferideal
1GbpsðSÞ 5 10s S, Xferideal
100MbpsðSÞ 5 100 S.
501


called mini-games, where player interaction follows different rules. Thus,
various levels of player interactivity coexist, and the game load cannot be
trivially computed—for example, using the linear models employed in Meng
and Long [23]. We started monitoring and collecting traces from the ofﬁcial
RuneScape Web page4 in August 2007.
We performed experiments in a simulated RuneScape-like environment with
the input workload consisting of the ﬁrst two weeks from the trace data. The
traces are sampled every two minutes (called simulation steps) and contain the
number of players over time for each server group used by the game operators.
This gives over 10,000 metric samples for each simulation, ensuring statistical
soundness. The data centers are located on four continents and seven countries,
as summarized in Table 19.2.
The hosters can use different hosting and lease policies, where each policy
describes resources offered in one bulk. The resources considered are CPU,
memory, and internal and external (Internet connection) network bandwidth.
The policies for virtualized resources also contain a group of parameters
describing the performance of the utilized virtualization technique, extracted
from the model described in Section 19.4.4. In the simulated environment,
game operators make requests to hosters and select resources based on the
policies described in Section 19.4.3. All hosters considered provide machines
with at least enough resources to handle one game server at full load—for
example, 2000 simultaneous clients for RuneScape. For virtualized resources,
we used the VMI-Plain instantiation model introduced in Section 19.4.4. We
did not use the VMI-SR model because the suspended VM images are stateless
in the current implementations and lose game state information upon suspend.
Additionally, the MMOG images are large in size and cause a VM start time
upon resume as large as the VM creation.
We run a series of experiments using this simulation model to evaluate the
impact of virtualized and nonvirtualized resources, either separately or in
conjunction, in scenarios involving one or more MMOG providers.
TABLE 19.2. RuneScape Data Centers Physical Characteristics
Location
Hosters
Machines (Total)
Continent
Country
Europe
Finland
2
8
Sweden
2
8
United Kingdom
2
20
Netherlands
2
15
North America
United States (West)
2
35
Canada (West)
1
15
United States (Central)
1
15
United States (East)
2
32
Canada (East)
1
10
Australia
Australia
2
8
502
MASSIVELY MULTIPLAYER ONLINE GAME HOSTING ON CLOUD RESOURCES


We evaluated the quality of the game experience using a resource under-
allocation metric that characterizes the percentage of resources that have not
been allocated from the amount necessary for the seamless execution of the
MMOG. We deﬁned resource under-allocation U(t) (in percentage) within one
simulation step T as
UðtÞ 5 ðA 2 LÞ  t
T  Lmax
 100
where t is the duration of the under-allocation event, A is the amount of
allocated resources, L is the amount of needed resources (measured from the
traces), and Lmax is the maximum load determined by game design.
We further evaluated the efﬁciency of resource allocation using a resource
over-allocation metric that characterizes the percentage of a resource (i.e., CPU,
memory, network) allocated from the used amount for the seamless execution
of a MMOG session. We deﬁned the resource over-allocation O(t) within one
simulation step T as
OðtÞ 5 ðL 2 AÞ  t
T  Lmax
 100
using the same notation deﬁned before.
Finally, we deﬁned the relative load of an experiment in a certain machine
conﬁguration as the percentage of the maximum theoretical RuneScape load
that could be hosted in the given setup. For example, the relative load of a game
session consisting of N zones hosted on M machines, where a machine can host
exactly one zone, is (N/M)U100.
19.5.2
Impact of Virtualized Hosting on MMOG Hosting
In this experiment we evaluated the effect of utilizing virtualized resources on the
game-play quality quantiﬁed using the resource under-allocation metric. We used
a ﬁxed set of resources distributed around the world (see Table 19.2) and
assigned to them ﬁve different allocation policies summarized in Table 19.3,
ranked from the ideal policy (Policy 0, indicating nonvirtualized resources) to the
least favorable policy (Policy 4) from a virtualization standpoint.
Figure 19.3 displays the variation of the average RuneScape under-allocation
as a function of different relative load conﬁgurations using the ﬁve different
policies. The results demonstrate that different virtualization policies have an
important impact on the quality of the game play indicated by the resource
under-allocation. The ﬁrst two virtualized resource policies (Policy 1 and Policy 2)
exhibit very close to ideal behavior. However, this is not the case for the other
two policies (Policy 3 and Policy 4), which have a negative effect on the
provisioning mechanism. The big difference in average under-allocation between
the ﬁrst two policies and the others is explained by the fact that our resource
allocation algorithm uses a prediction service (see Section 19.4.2). If a
19.5
EXPERIMENTS
503


provisioned resource becomes active (e.g., ﬁnishes the initialization process
consisting of VM transfer, VM start, and game server start) in a shorter time than
predicted, it will not cause any under-allocation events.
We conclude that using virtualized resources directly affects the served
MMOG sessions, especially at higher load volumes (which is very often the case
in MMOG hosting) to a degree dependent on the data centers’ allocation
policies. The impact of these policies is quantiﬁed in Section 19.5.3. The use of
prediction to drive the proactive resource allocation hides the virtualization
overheads to a certain degree given by the prediction timestep and accuracy.
19.5.3
Impact of Data Center Policies on MMOG Hosting
In the previous section we showed a signiﬁcant negative impact on the quality
of service delivered by the game operators when using virtualized resources
when confronted with high relative loads, however, it is not yet clear which
characteristics of the virtualized resources determine this behavior.
In this second batch of experiments, we quantify the impact of the virtualiza-
tion parameters modeled in Section 19.4.4 on the resource under-allocation. We
preserved the same pool of resources as in the previous experiment; we also
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
Ideal
Policy 1
Policy 2
Policy 3
Policy 4
Load
Average under-allocation
FIGURE 19.3. The impact of using different virtualized resources on quality of the
resource provisioning under increasing load.
TABLE 19.3. Virtualization Section of Allocation Policies
Policy
Name
CPU
(Units)
Memory
(Units)
ExtNet
(in/out)
(Units)
Time
(min)
VM
start
(sec)
Image
Size
(GB)
Bandwidth
(Mbit)
Virtualization
Penalty
Policy 0
0.4
0.25
n/a
360
0
0
0
0
Policy 1
0.4
0.25
n/a
360
30
0.25
500
1%
Policy 2
0.4
0.25
n/a
360
60
0.5
500
3%
Policy 3
0.4
0.25
n/a
360
90
1
500
5%
Policy 4
0.4
0.25
n/a
360
120
2
500
10%
504
MASSIVELY MULTIPLAYER ONLINE GAME HOSTING ON CLOUD RESOURCES


generated four ranges of hosting policies, each of them sweeping the value ranges
of one virtualization parameter while keeping the others ﬁxed (see Table 19.4).
The ﬁxed values are selected based on realistic data published by major providers
of virtualized resources and other benchmark reports. We set the VM prepara-
tion time to zero (since all MMOG images can only be pre-created), the VM start
time to 80 seconds as determined in Ostermann et al. [26], the VM size to 0.5 GB
(which is average for base images with pre-deployed software), the transfer
bandwidth to 100 Mbps, and the performance penalty of the game servers
running inside virtualized resources to 5% [1]. We varied the relative load from
70% to 95% using a stride of 10.
Figures 19.4 and 19.5 show that average resource under-allocation grows
linearly with the VM size and VM start time. The same growing pattern holds
for different degrees of relative load with no artifacts. We conclude that the
impact of these parameters on the game play is predictable and that the resource
under-allocation is roughly growing by 10% per GB of VM image size and by
1.5% for each additional 10 sec of VM start time.
Figures 19.6 and 19.7 show that the VM transfer bandwidth and virtualiza-
tion penalty have little or no impact on the resource under-allocation, since
TABLE 19.4. Data Center Resource Allocation Policies Used for the Quantiﬁcation
of the Impact of Each of the Virtualization Parameters
Policy Name
VM Start
(sec)
Image Size
(GB)
Transfer
Bandwidth
(Mbit)
Virtualization
Penalty
VM start (16)
20170
0.5
100
5%
VM size (16)
80
0.251.5
100
5%
VM transfer (16)
80
0.5
100100
5%
Virtualization penalty
(16)
80
0.5
100
2%12%
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
VM size [GB]
Average under-allocation
70% Load
80% Load
90% Load
95% Load
FIGURE 19.4. Variation of under-allocation with image size for different loads.
19.5
EXPERIMENTS
505
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>


0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
VM transfer bandwidth [Mbps]
Average under-allocation
70% Load
80% Load
90% Load
95% Load
FIGURE 19.6. Variation of under-allocation with image transfer bandwidth for different
loads.
0%
2%
4%
6%
Virtualisation penalty
8%
10%
12%
14%
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
Average under-allocation
70% Load
80% Load
90% Load
95% Load
FIGURE 19.7. Variation of under-allocation with virtualization penalty for different
loads.
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
70% Load
80% Load
90% Load
95% Load
VM start [seconds]
Average under-allocation
FIGURE 19.5. Variation of under-allocation with image boot time for different loads.
506
MASSIVELY MULTIPLAYER ONLINE GAME HOSTING ON CLOUD RESOURCES


their effect is negligible compared to the other virtualization parameters and
can be easily hidden by the proactive (prediction-based) resource allocation.
However, at relative load values higher than 90%, they exhibit irregular
behavior as a result of less powerful resources being used which introduce
signiﬁcant overheads.
19.6
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
Currently we are conducting more experiments in an environment consisting of
multiple game operators competing for resources. We are also studying the impact
of resource selection policies on under-allocation, the virtualization impact on
resource over-allocation, and different player interaction and complexity models.
19.7
CONCLUSIONS
In this chapter we proposed an enhanced MMOG ecosystem in which a game
operator manages a distributed MMOG session by renting on-demand virtua-
lized resources from distributed cloud providers called hosters. We presented a
new analytical model for expressing the overheads added by the virtualization
software consisting of four components (VM image preparation, VM transfer,
VM start, and VM removal) extracted from published benchmarks. Using
trace-based simulation, we evaluated the effect of utilizing virtualized resources
on the quality of game-play of a highly popular MMOG called RuneScape. We
learned that using virtualized resources can negatively affect the MMOG
session at high load volumes, which is a common case in MMOG hosting.
We quantiﬁed the impact of our virtualization overheads on the quality of
game play and found out that resource under-allocation grows linearly with the
VM size and VM start time, while the VM transfer bandwidth and virtualiza-
tion penalty have little impact.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partially funded by the European Union through the IST-
034601 edutain@grid project and the Austrian Federal Ministry for Education,
Science, and Culture through the GZ BMWF-10.220/0002-II/10/2007 Austrian
Grid project.
REFERENCES
1.
R. Bartle, Designing Virtual Worlds, New Riders, Indianapolis, IN 2003.
2.
A. Shaikh, S. Sahu, M.-C. Rosu, M. Shea, D. Saha, On demand platform for
online games, IBM Systems Journal, 45(1):720, 2006.
REFERENCES
507


3.
V. Nae, A. Iosup, S. Podlipnig, R. Prodan, D. Epema, T. Fahringer, Efﬁcient
management of data center resources for massively multiplayer online games, in
Proceedings of the International Conference on High Performance Computing,
Networking, Storage and Analysis, November 2008, pp. 112.
4.
B. Walters, VMware virtual platform,
Linux Journal, Vol: 1999, Issue: 63es,
Article: 6, 1999.
5.
P. Barham, B. Dragovic, K. Fraser, S. Hand, T. Harris, A. Ho, R. Neugebauer, I.
Pratt, A. Warﬁeld, Xen and the art of virtualization, in Proceedings of the ACM
Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, 2003, pp. 164177.
6.
Y. Lamia, R. Wolski, and G. Brent, Paravirtualization for HPC Systems, ISPA
Workshops, Vol. LNCS 4331, Springer, Berlin, 2006, pp. 474486.
7.
E. Deelman, G. Singh, M. Livny, B. Berriman, J. Good, The cost of doing science
on the cloud: The Montage example, in Proceedings of the IEEE Supercomputing
Conference, 2008, pp. 112.
8.
M.R. Palankar, A. Onibokun, A. Iamnitchi, and M. Ripeanu, Amazon S3 for
science Grids: A viable solution?, in ACM International Workshop on Data-Aware
Distributed Computing, 2008, pp. 5564.
9.
E. Walker, Benchmarking Amazon EC2 for high-performance scientiﬁc comput-
ing, Login, 33(5):1823, 2008.
10.
A.B. Nagarajan, F. Mueller, C. Engelmann, and S. L. Scott, Proactive fault
tolerance for HPC with Xen virtualization, in ACM 21st International Conference
on Supercomputing, 2007, pp. 2332.
11.
Y. Lamia, K. Seymour, H. You, J. Dongarra, and R. Wolski, The impact of
paravirtualized memory hierarchy on linear algebra computational kernels and
software, in ACM High Performance Distributed Computing, 2008, pp. 141152.
12.
B. Quetier, V. Neri, and F. Cappello, Scalability comparison of four host
virtualization tools, Journal of Grid Computing, 5(1):8398, 2007.
13.
N. Sotomayor, K. Keahey, and I. Foster, Overhead matters: A model for virtual
resource management, in International Workshop on Virtualization Technology in
Distributed Computing, 2006, pp. 411.
14.
T. Freeman and K. Keahey, Flying low: Simple leases with workspace pilot, in
Proceedings of EuroPar, Vol. LNCS 5168, Springer, Berlin, 2008, pp. 499509.
15.
C. Xingchen, K. Nadiminti, C. Jin, S. Venugopal, and R. Buyya, Aneka: Next-
Generation Enterprise Grid Platform for e-Science and e-Business Applications, in
Proceedings of the 3rd IEEE International Conference on e-Science and Grid
Computing, 2007, pp. 151159.
16.
R. Buyya, C. Shin Yeo, and S. Venugopal, Market-oriented cloud computing:
Vision, hype, and reality for delivering IT services as computing utilities, in IEEE
International Conference on High Performance Computing and Communications
(HPCC 2008), Dalian, China, 2008, pp. 513.
17.
M. D. de Assuncao, A. di Costanzo, and R. Buyya, Evaluating the costbeneﬁt of
using cloud computing to extend the capacity of clusters, in ACM International
Symposium on High-Performance Distributed Computing, 2009, pp. 141150.
18.
M.-E. Begin, An EGEE Comparative Study: Grids and Clouds—Evolution or
Revolution?, Technical Report, Enabling Grids for E-sciencE Project, 2008.
508
MASSIVELY MULTIPLAYER ONLINE GAME HOSTING ON CLOUD RESOURCES


19.
J. Rolia, X. Zhu, M. Arlitt, A. Andrzejak, Statistical service assurances for applica-
tions in utility grid environments, Performance Evaluation, 58(23):319339, 2004.
20.
B. Urgaonkar, G. Paciﬁci, P. Shenoy, M. Spreitzer, and. A. Tantawi, An analytical
model for multi-tier internet services and its applications, in Measurement and
Modeling of Computer Systems, ACM SIGMETRICS, 2005, pp. 291302.
21.
B. Urgaonkar, P. Shenoy, and A. C. P. Goyal, Dynamic provisioning of Multi-tier
Internet applications, in 2nd International Conference on Autonomic Computing,
IEEE Computer Society, 2005, pp. 217228.
22.
M. Aron, P. Druschel, and W. Zwaenepoel, Cluster reserves: A mechanism for
resource management in cluster-based network servers, in Measurement and
Modeling of Computer Systems, ACM SIGMETRICS, 2000, pp. 90-101.
23.
Y. Meng and C. Long, System performance modeling for massively multiplayer
online role-playing games, IBM Systems Journal, 45(1):4558, 2006.
24.
V. Nae, R. Prodan, and T. Fahringer, Neural network-based load prediction for
highly dynamic distributed online games, in Proceedings of Euro-Par, Springer,
Vol. LNCS 5168, 2008, pp. 202211.
25.
A. Karve, T. Kimbrel, G. Paciﬁci, M. Spreitzer, M. Steinder, M. Sviridenko, and
A. Tantawi, Dynamic placement for clustered web applications, in 15th Interna-
tional Conference on World Wide Web, ACM, 2006, pp. 595604.
26.
S. Ostermann, A. Iosup, N. Yigitbasi, R. Prodan, T. Fahringer, and D. Epema, An
Early Performance Analysis of Cloud Computing Services for Scientiﬁc Comput-
ing, Delft University of Technology, Technical Report, PDS-2008-006, 2008.
REFERENCES
509


CHAPTER 20
BUILDING CONTENT DELIVERY
NETWORKS USING CLOUDS
JAMES BROBERG
20.1
INTRODUCTION
Numerous “storage cloud” providers (or “Storage as a Service”) have recently
emerged that can provide Internet-enabled content storage and delivery cap-
abilities in several continents, offering service-level agreement (SLA)-backed
performance and uptime promises for their services. Customers are charged only
for their utilization of storage and transfer of content (i.e., a utility computing [1]
model), which is typically on the order of cents per gigabyte. This represents a
large paradigm shift away from typical hosting arrangements that were prevalent
in the past, where average customers were locked into hosting contracts (with set
monthly/yearly fees and excess data charges) on shared hosting services like
DreamHost [2]. Larger enterprise customers typically utilized pervasive and
high-performing Content Delivery Networks (CDNs) like Akamai [3, 4] and
Limelight, who operate extensive networks of “edge” servers that deliver content
across the globe. In recent years it has become increasingly difﬁcult for
competitors to build and maintain competing CDN infrastructure, and a once
healthy landscape of CDN companies has been reduced to a handful via mergers,
acquisitions, and failed companies [5]. However, far from democratizing the
delivery of content, the most pervasive remaining CDN provider (Akamai) is
priced out of the reach of most small to medium-sized enterprises (SMEs),
government agencies, universities, and charities [6]. As a result, the idea of
utilizing storage clouds as a poor man’s CDN is very enticing. At face value, these
storage providers promise the ability to rapidly and cheaply “scale-out” to meet
both ﬂash crowds (which is the dream and the nightmare of most Web-site
operators) and anticipated increases in demand. Economies of scale, in terms of
Cloud Computing: Principles and Paradigms,
Edited by Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg and
Andrzej Goscinski
Copyright r 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
511


cost effectiveness and performance for both providers and end users, could be
achieved by leveraging existing “storage cloud” infrastructure, instead of
investing large amounts of money in their own content delivery platform or
utilizing one of the incumbent operators like Akamai. In Section 20.2, we analyze
the services provided by these storage providers, and well as their respective cost
structures, to ascertain if they are a good ﬁt for basic content delivery needs.
These emerging services have reduced the cost of content storage and delivery
by several orders of magnitude, but they can be difﬁcult to use for nondevelopers,
because each service is best utilized via unique Web services or programmer APIs
and have their own unique quirks. Many Web sites have utilized individual
storage clouds to deliver some or all of their content [7], most notably the New
York Times [8] and SmugMug [9]; however, there is no general-purpose, reusable
framework to interact with multiple storage cloud providers and leverage their
services as a content delivery network. Most “storage cloud” providers are
merely basic ﬁle storage and delivery services and do not offer the capabilities of a
fully featured CDN such as automatic replication, fail-over, geographical load
redirection, and load balancing. Furthermore, a customer may need coverage in
more locations than offered by a single provider. To address this, in Section 20.3
we introduce MetaCDN, a system that utilizes numerous storage providers in
order to create an overlay network that can be used as a high-performance,
reliable, and redundant geographically distributed CDN.
However, in order to utilize storage and ﬁle delivery from these providers in
MetaCDN as a Content Delivery Network, we want to ensure that they provide
sufﬁcient performance (i.e., predictable and sufﬁcient response time and
throughput) and reliability (i.e., redundancy, ﬁle consistency). While individual
storage clouds have been trialed successfully for application domains such as
science grids [10, 11] and offsite ﬁle backup [23], their utility for general-
purpose content delivery, which requires low latency and high throughput, has
not been evaluated rigorously. In Section 20.4 we summarize the performance
ﬁndings to date for popular storage clouds as well as for the MetaCDN overlay
itself. In Section 20.5 we consider the future directions of MetaCDN and
identify potential enhancements for the service. Finally, in Section 20.6 we offer
some concluding remarks and summarize our contribution.
20.2
BACKGROUND/RELATED WORK
In order to ascertain the feasibility of building a content delivery network service
from storage clouds, it is important to ascertain whether the storage clouds used
possess the necessary features, performance, and reliability characteristics to act
as CDN replica servers. While performance is crucial for content delivery, we also
need to examine the cost structures of the different providers. At face value these
services may appear ludicrously cheap; however, they have subtle differences in
pricing and the type of services billed to the end user, and as a result a user could
get a nasty surprise if they have not understood what they will be charged for.
512
BUILDING CONTENT DELIVERY NETWORKS USING CLOUDS


For the purposes of this chapter, we chose to analyze the four most prominent
storage cloud providers: Amazon Simple Storage Service (S3) and CloudFront
(CF), Nirvanix Storage Delivery Network (SDN), Rackspace Cloud Files, and
Microsoft Azure Storage, described in Sections 20.2.1, 20.2.2, 20.2.3 and 20.2.4,
respectively. At the time of writing, Amazon offers storage nodes in the United
States and Europe (speciﬁcally, Ireland) while Nirvanix has storage nodes in the
United States (over three separate sites in California, Texas, and New Jersey),
Germany, and Japan. Another storage cloud provider of note is Rackspace
Cloud Files, located in Dallas, Texas, which recently launched in late 2008.
Microsoft has also announced their cloud storage offering, Azure Storage
Service, which has data centers in Asia, Europe, and the United States and
formally launched as an SLA-backed commercial service in April 2010. An
enterprise class CDN service typically offers audio and video encoding and
adaptive delivery, so we will consider cloud-based encoding services such as
encoding.com that offer similar capability in Section 20.2.5.
20.2.1
Amazon Simple Storage and CloudFront
Amazon S3 was launched in the United States in March 2006 and in Europe in
November 2007, opening up the huge infrastructure that Amazon themselves
utilize to run their highly successful e-commerce company, Amazon.com. In
November 2008, Amazon launched CloudFront, a content delivery service that
added 14 edge locations (8 in the United States, 4 in Europe, and 2 in Asia).
However, unlike S3, CloudFront does not offer persistent storage. Rather, it is
analogous to a proxy cache, with ﬁles deployed to the different CloudFront
locations based on demand and removed automatically when no longer
required. CloudFront also offers “streaming distributions” that can distribute
audio and video content in real time, using the Real-Time Messaging Protocol
(RTMP) instead of the HTTP protocol.
Amazon provides REST and SOAP interfaces to its storage resources,
allowing users the ability to read, write, or delete an unlimited amount
of objects, with sizes ranging from 1 byte to 5 gigabytes each. As noted in
Table 20.1, Amazon S3 has a storage cost of $0.15 per GB/month in their
standard U.S. and EU data centers, or $0.165 per GB/month in their North
California data center. Incoming trafﬁc (i.e., uploads) are charged at $0.10 per
GB/month, and outgoing trafﬁc (i.e., downloads) are charged at $0.15 per GB/
month, from the U.S. or EU sites. For larger customers, Amazon S3 has a
sliding scale pricing scheme, which is depicted in Figure 20.1. Discounts for
outgoing data occur after 10TB, 50 TB and 150 TB of data a month has been
transferred, resulting in a subtly sublinear pricing response that is depicted
in the ﬁgure. As a point of comparison, we have included the “average” cost of
the top four to ﬁve major incumbent CDN providers.1 An important facet of
1Information obtained from Rayburn [6] and http://www.cdnpricing.com, part of a popular blog
for CDN and streaming media professionals run by StreamingMedia.com. Figures were taken from
the latest survey data available (Q4 2009).
20.2
BACKGROUND/RELATED WORK
513


TABLE 20.1. Pricing Comparison of Cloud Storage Vendors
Cost
Type
Nirvanix
SDNa
Amazon
S3
U.S./EU
Standardb
Amazon
S3 U.S.
N. Californiab
Rackspace
Cloud
Files
Microsoft
Azure
Storage
NA/EU
Microsoft
Azure
Storage
Asia Paciﬁc
Incoming
data
($/GB)
0.18
0.10
0.10
0.08
0.10
0.30
Outgoing
data
($/GB)
0.18
0.15
0.15
0.22
0.15
0.45
Storage
($/GB)
0.25
0.15
0.165
0.15
0.15
0.15
Requests
($/1000
PUT)
0.00
0.01
0.011
0.02
0.001
0.001
Requests
($/10,000
GET)
0.00
0.01
0.011
0.00
0.01
0.01
aPricing valid for storage, uploads, and download usage under 2 TB/month.
bPricing valid for ﬁrst 50 TB/month of storage used and ﬁrst 1 GB/month data transfer out.
0
50000
100000
Outgoing TB Data/month
150000
200000
250000
0
20000
40000
60000
80000
100000
$USD/month
120000
Amazon S3 (all)
Amazon CF US/EU
Amazon CF HK/SING
Amazon CF JAP
Nirvarix SDN
Rackspace Cloud Files
Windows Azure Storage NA/EU
Windows Azure Storage APAC
Traditional CDN (avg.)
FIGURE 20.1. Pricing comparison of cloud storage vendors based on usage.
514
BUILDING CONTENT DELIVERY NETWORKS USING CLOUDS


Amazon’s pricing that should be noted by users (but is not captured by Figure
20.1) is the additional cost per 1000 PUT/POST/LIST or 10,000 GET HTTP
requests, which can add up depending on the type of content a user places on
Amazon S3. While these costs are negligible if a user is utilizing Amazon S3 to
primarily distribute very large ﬁles, if they are storing and serving smaller ﬁles,
a user could see signiﬁcant extra costs on their bill. For users serving content
with a lower average ﬁle size (e.g., 100 kB), a larger cost is incurred.
20.2.2
Nirvanix Storage Delivery Network
Nirvanix launched its Amazon S3 competitor, the Nirvanix Storage Delivery
Network (SDN), on September 2007. The Nirvanix service was notable in that
it had an SLA-backed uptime guarantee at a time when Amazon S3 was simply
operated on a best-effort service basis. Unsurprisingly, shortly after Nirvanix
launched its SDN, Amazon added their own SLA-backed uptime guarantees.
Nirvanix differentiates itself in several ways (depicted in Table 20.2), notably by
having coverage in four regions, offering automatic ﬁle replication over sites in
the SDN for performance and redundancy, and supporting ﬁle sizes up to 256
GB. Nirvanix is priced slightly higher than Amazon’s service, and they do not
publish their pricing rates for larger customers (2 TB/month). Nirvanix provides
access to their resources via SOAP or REST interfaces, as well as providing
SDK’s in Java, PHP Zend, Python, and C#.
20.2.3
Rackspace Cloud Files
Rackspace (formerly Mosso) Cloud Files provides a self-serve storage and
delivery service in a fashion similar to that of the Amazon and Nirvanix offerings.
The core Cloud Files offering is served from a multizoned, redundant data center
in Dallas, Texas. The service is notable in that it also provides CDN integration.
Rather than building their own CDN extension to the Cloud Files platform as
TABLE 20.2. Feature Comparison of Cloud Storage Vendors
Feature
Nirvanix
SDN
Amazon
S3
Amazon
Cloud Front
Rackspace
Cloud
Files
Microsoft
Azure
Storage
SLA
99.9
99.9
99.9
99.9
99.9
Max. size
256 GB
5 GB
5 Gb
5 GB
50 GB
U.S. PoP
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
EU PoP
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Asia PoP
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Aus PoP
No
No
No
Yes
No
File ACL
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Replication
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
API
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
20.2
BACKGROUND/RELATED WORK
515


Amazon has done for S3, Rackspace has partnered with a traditional CDN
service, Limelight, to distribute ﬁles stored on the Cloud Files platform to edge
nodes operated by Limelight. Unlike Amazon CloudFront, Rackspace does not
charge for moving data from the core Cloud Files servers to the CDN edge
locations. Rackspace provides RESTful APIs as well as API bindings for popular
languages such as PHP, Python, Ruby, Java, and .NET.
20.2.4
Azure Storage Service
Microsoft’s Windows Azure platform offers a comparable storage and delivery
platform called Azure Storage, which provides persistent and redundant
storage in the cloud. For delivering ﬁles, the Blob service is used to store ﬁles
up to 50 GB in size. On a per storage account basis, the ﬁles can be stored and
delivered from data centers in Asia (East and South East), the United States
(North Central and South Central), and Europe (North and West). Azure
Storage accounts can also be extended by a CDN service that provides an
additional 18 locations globally across the United States, Europe, Asia,
Australia, and South America. This CDN extension is still under testing and
is currently being offered to customers as a Community Technology Preview
(CTP) at no charge.
20.2.5
Encoding Services
Video and audio encoding services are also individually available from cloud
vendors. Two notable providers are encoding.com and Nirvanix (previously
discussed in Section 20.2.2). The endoing.com service is a cloud-based video
encoding platform that can take a raw video ﬁle and generate an encoded ﬁle
suitable for streaming. The service supports a number of video output formats
that are suitable for smartphones (e.g., iPhone) right up to high-quality H.264
desktop streaming. A variety of integration services are available, allowing the
encoded ﬁle to be placed on a private server, Amazon S3 bucket, or Rackspace
Cloud Files folder. Nirvanix also offers video encoding as a service, offering a
limited number of H.263 and H.264 encoding proﬁles in a Flash (ﬂv) or MPEG-4
(mp4) container. The resulting encodes are stored on the Nirvanix SDN.
20.3
METACDN: HARNESSING STORAGE CLOUDS FOR
LOW-COST, HIGH-PERFORMANCE CONTENT DELIVERY
In this section we introduce MetaCDN, a system that leverages the existing
storage clouds and encoding services described in Section 20.2, creating an
integrated overlay network that aims to provide a low-cost, high-performance,
easy-to-use content delivery network for content creators and consumers.
The MetaCDN service (depicted in Figure 20.2) is presented to end users in
two ways. First, it can be presented as a Web portal, which was developed using
516
BUILDING CONTENT DELIVERY NETWORKS USING CLOUDS


Amazon S3 &
CloudFront
JetS3t toolkit
Java SDK
Open Source
Nirvanix SDK
Java SDK
Nirvanix, Inc
AmazonS3Connector
NirvanixConnector
MetaCDN
MetaCDN
Manager
Web Portal
Web Service
Load Redirector
MetaCDN QoS
Monitor
MetaCDN
Allocator
MetaCDN
Database
Java stub
MetaCDN.org
Java (JSF/EJB) based portal
Support HTTP POST
New/view/modify deployment
<uses>
User 1
User 2
Consumer 1
Consumer 2
Consumer n
User n
<uses>
<uses>
<uses>
<uses>
<uses>
SOAP Web Service
RESTful Web Service
Programmatic access
Random redirection
Geographical redirection
Least cost redirection
Java stub
MetaCDN.org
CloudFilesConnector
Java stub
MetaCDN.org
EncodingEncoder
NirvanixEncoder
FFmpegEncoder
Java stub
MetaCDN.org
Java stub
MetaCDN.org
Java stub
MetaCDN.org
Cloud Files SDK
Java SDK
Mosso, Inc
AzureConnector
Java stub
MetaCDN.org
WebDAVConnector
SCPConnector
FTPConnector
Java stub
MetaCDN.org
Java stub
MetaCDN.org
Java stub
MetaCDN.org
Encoding.com
Nirvanix
Shared/Private
Host
Niranix SDN
Mosso Cloud
Files CDN
Microsoft Azure
Storage Service
Shared/Private
Host
FIGURE 20.2. The MetaCDN architecture.
517


(a) Java Enterprise and Java Server Faces (JSF) technologies, with a MySQL
back-end to store user accounts and deployments, and (b) the capabilities,
pricing, and historical performance of service providers. The Web portal acts as
the entry point to the system and also functions as an application-level load
balancer for end users that wish to download content that has been deployed
by MetaCDN. Using the Web portal, users can sign up for an account on the
MetaCDN system (depicted in Figure 20.3) and enter credentials for any cloud
storage or other provider they have an account with. Once this simple step has
been performed, they can utilize the MetaCDN system to intelligently deploy
content onto storage providers according to their performance requirements
and budget limitations. The Web portal is most suited for small or ad hoc
deployments and is especially useful for less technically inclined content
creators.
FIGURE 20.3. Registering storage vendors in the MetaCDN GUI.
518
BUILDING CONTENT DELIVERY NETWORKS USING CLOUDS


The second method of accessing the MetaCDN service is via RESTful Web
Services. These Web Services expose all of the functionality of the MetaCDN
system. This access method is most suited for customers with more complex
and frequently changing content delivery needs, allowing them to integrate
the MetaCDN service in their own origin Web sites and content creation
workﬂows.
20.3.1
Integrating “Cloud Storage” Providers
The MetaCDN system works by integrating with each storage provider via
connectors (shown in Figures 20.2 and 20.4) that provides an abstraction to
hide the complexity arising from the differences in how each provider allows
access to their systems. An abstract class, DefaultConnector, prescribes the
basic functionality that each provider could be expected to support, and it must
be implemented for all existing and future connectors. These include basic
operations like creation, deletion, and renaming of replicated ﬁles and folders.
If an operation is not supported on a particular service, then the connector for
that service throws a FeatureNotSupportedException. This is crucial, because
while the providers themselves have very similar functionality, there are some
key differences, such as the largest allowable ﬁle size or the coverage footprint.
Figure 20.4 shows two connectors (for Amazon S3 and Nirvanix SDN,
respectively), highlighting one of Amazon’s most well-known limitations—
that you cannot rename a ﬁle, which should result in a FeatureNotSupported-
Exception if called. Instead, you must delete the ﬁle and re-upload it. The
Nirvanix connector throws a FeatureNotSupportedException when you try and
create a Bittorrent deployment, because it does not support this functionality,
unlike Amazon S3. Connectors are also available for (a) shared or private hosts
via connectors for commonly available FTP-accessible shared Web hosting
(shown in Figure 20.4) and (b) privately operated Web hosting that may be
available via SSH/SCP or WebDAV protocols.
AmazonS3Connector
DefaultConnector
NirvanixConnector
<<exception>>
FeatureNotSupportedException
FeatureNotSupportedException(msg)
createFolder(foldername, location)
deleteFolder(foldername)
createFile(file, foldername,
                 location, date)
createFile(fileURL, foldername,
                 location, date)
renameFile(filename, newname,
                 location) throws
      FeatureNetSupportedException
createTorrent(file)
createTOrrent(fileURL)
deleteFile(file, location)
listFilesAndFolders()
deleteFilesAndFolders()
DEPLOY_USA
DEPLOY_EU
DEPLOY_ASIA
DEPLOY_AUS
createFolder(foldername, location)
deleteFolder(foldername)
createFile(file, foldername,
                 location, date)
createFile(fileURL, foldername,
                 locatrion, date)
renameFile(filename, newname,
                 location)
createTorrent(file)
createTorrent(fileURL)
deleteFile(file, location)
listFilesAndFolders()
deleteFilesAndFolders()
createFolder(foldername, location)
deleteFolder(foldername)
createFile(file, foldername,
                 location, date)
createFile(fileURL, foldername,
                 locatrion, date)
renameFile(filename, newname,
                 location)
createTorrent(file) throws
      FeatureNotSupportedException
createTorrent(fileURL) throws
      FeatureNotSupportedException
deleteFile(file, location)
listFilesAndFolders()
deleteFilesAndFolders()
FIGURE 20.4. Design of the MetaCDN connectors.
20.3
METACDN: HARNESSING STORAGE CLOUDS
519


20.3.2
Overall Design and Architecture of the System
The MetaCDN service has a number of core components that contain the logic
and management layers required to encapsulate the functionality of different
upstream storage providers and present a consistent, uniﬁed view of the services
available to end users. These components include the MetaCDN Allocator,
which (a) selects the optimal providers to deploy content to and (b) performs
the actual physical deployment. The MetaCDN QoS monitor tracks the current
and historical performance of participating storage providers, and the Me-
taCDN Manager tracks each user’s current deployment and performs various
housekeeping tasks. The MetaCDN Database stores crucial information needed
by the MetaCDN portal, ensuring reliable and persistent operation of the
system. The MetaCDN Load Redirector is responsible for directing MetaCDN
end users (i.e., content consumers) to the most appropriate ﬁle replica, ensuring
good performance at all times.
The MetaCDN Database stores crucial information needed by the Me-
taCDN system, such as MetaCDN user details, their credentials for various
storage cloud and other providers, and information tracking their (origin)
content and any replicas made of such content. Usage information for each
replica (e.g., download count and last access) is recorded in order to track the
cost incurred for speciﬁc content, ensuring that it remains within budget if
one has been speciﬁed. The database also tracks logistical details regarding the
content storage and delivery providers utilized in MetaCDN, such as their
pricing, SLA offered, historical performance, and their coverage locations. The
MetaCDN Database Entity Relationship is depicted in Figure 20.5, giving a
high-level semantic data model of the MetaCDN system.
The MetaCDN Allocator allows users to deploy ﬁles either directly (upload-
ing a ﬁle from their local ﬁle system) or from an already publicly accessible
origin Web site (sideloading the ﬁle, where the backend storage provider pulls
the ﬁle). It is important to note that not all back-end providers support
MetaCDN
User
has
deployed
as
has
Content
MetaCDN
Replica
CDN
Credentials
for
CDN
Provider
has
QoS Monitor
measures
Coverage
locations
hosted
by
hosted
at
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
M
M
1
0 : M
0 : M
M
M
FIGURE 20.5. Entity relationship diagram for the MetaCDN database.
520
BUILDING CONTENT DELIVERY NETWORKS USING CLOUDS


sideloading, and this is naturally indicated to users as appropriate. MetaCDN
users are given a number of different deployment options depending on their
needs, regardless of whether they access the service via the Web portal or via
Web services. It is important to note that the deployment option chosen also
dictates the load redirection policy that directs end users (consumers) to a
speciﬁc replica. The available deployment options include:
 Maximize coverage and performance, where MetaCDN deploys as many
replicas as possible to all available locations. The replicas used for the
experiments in previous performance studies [12, 13] were deployed by
MetaCDN using this option. The MetaCDN Load Redirector directs end
users to the closest physical replica.
 Deploy content in speciﬁc locations, where a user nominates regions and
MetaCDN matches the requested regions with providers that service those
areas. The MetaCDN Load Redirector directs end users to the closest physical
replica.
 Cost-optimized deployment, where MetaCDN deploys as many replicas in
the locations requested by the user as their storage and transfer budget will
allow, keeping them active until that budget is exhausted. The MetaCDN
Load Redirector directs end users to the cheapest replica to minimize cost and
maximize the lifetime of the deployment.
 Quality of service (QoS)-optimized deployment, where MetaCDN deploys
to providers that match speciﬁc QoS targets that a user speciﬁes, such
as average throughput or response time from a particular location, which
is tracked by persistent probing from the MetaCDN QoS monitor. The
MetaCDN Load Redirector directs end users to the best-performing replica
for their speciﬁc region based on historical measurements from the QoS
monitor.
After MetaCDN deploys replicas using one of the above options, it stores
pertinent details such as the provider used, the URL of the replica, the desired
lifetime of the replica, and the physical location (latitude and longitude) of that
deployment in the MetaCDN Database. A geolocation service (either free2 or
commercial3) is used to ﬁnd the latitude and longitude of where the ﬁle is
stored.
The MetaCDN QoS Monitor tracks the performance of participating
providers (and their available storage and delivery locations) periodically,
monitoring and recording performance and reliability metrics from a variety of
locations, which is used for QoS-optimized deployment matching. Speciﬁcally,
this component tracks the historical response time, throughput, hops and HTTP
2Hostip.info is a community-based project to geolocate IP addresses, and it makes the database
freely available.
3MaxMind GeoIP is a commercial IP geolocation service that can determine information such as
country, region, city, postal code, area code, and longitude/latitude.
20.3
METACDN: HARNESSING STORAGE CLOUDS
521


response codes (e.g., 2XX, 3XX, 4XX, or 5XX, which denotes success,
redirection/proxying, client error, or server error) of replicas located at each
coverage location. This information is utilized when performing a QoS-opti-
mized deployment (described previously).
This component also ensures that upstream providers are meeting their
service-level agreements (SLAs), and it provides a logging audit trail to allow
end users to claim credit in the event that the SLA is broken. This is crucial,
because you cannot depend on the back-end service providers themselves to
voluntarily provide credit or admit fault in the event of an outage. In effect, this
keeps the providers “honest”; and due to the agile and ﬂuid nature of the
system, MetaCDN can redeploy content with minimal effort to alternative
providers that can satisfy the QoS constraints, if available.
The MetaCDN Manager has a number of housekeeping responsibilities.
First, it ensures that all current deployments are meeting QoS targets of users
that have made QoS optimized deployments. Second, it ensures that replicas
are removed when no longer required (i.e., the “deploy until” date set by the
user has expired), ensuring that storage costs are minimized at all times. Third,
for users that have made cost-optimized deployments, it ensures that a user’s
budget has not been exceeded, by tracking usage (i.e., storage and downloads)
from auditing information provided by upstream providers.
20.3.3
Integration of Geo-IP Services and Google Maps
Cloud storage offerings are already available from providers located across the
globe. The principle of cloud computing and storage is that you shouldn’t need
to care where the processing occurs or where your data are stored—the services
are essentially a black box. However, your software and data are subject to the
laws of the nations they are executed and stored in. Cloud storage users could
ﬁnd themselves inadvertently running afoul of the Digital Millennium Copy-
right Act (DMCA)4 or Cryptography Export laws that may not apply to them
in their own home nations. As such, it is important for cloud storage users to
know precisely where their data are stored. Furthermore, this information is
crucial for MetaCDN load balancing purposes, so end users are redirected to
the closest replica, to maximize their download speeds and minimize latency.
To address this issue, MetaCDN offers its users the ability to pinpoint exactly
where their data are stored via geolocation services and Google Maps
integration. When MetaCDN deploys replicas to different cloud storage
providers, they each return a URL pointing to the location of the replica.
MetaCDN then utilizes a geolocation service to ﬁnd the latitude and longitude
of where the ﬁle is stored. This information is stored in the MetaCDN database
and can be overlaid onto a Google Maps view (see Figure 20.6) inside the
MetaCDN portal, giving users a bird’s-eye view of where their data are
currently being stored (depicted in Figure 20.6).
4Available at http://www.copyright.gov/legislation/dmca.pdf.
522
BUILDING CONTENT DELIVERY NETWORKS USING CLOUDS


20.3.4
Load Balancing via DNS and HTTP
The MetaCDN Load Redirector is responsible for directing MetaCDN end users
(i.e., content consumers) to the most appropriate ﬁle replica. When a MetaCDN
user deploys content, they are given a single URL, in the format http://www.
metacdn.org/MetaCDN/FileMapper?itemid 5 {item_id}, where item_id is a
unique key associated with the deployed content. This provides a single name-
space, which is more convenient for both MetaCDN users (content deployers)
and end users (content consumers), and offers automatic and totally transparent
load balancing for the latter.
Different load balancing and redirection policies can be utilized, including
simple random allocation, where end users are redirected to a random replica;
geographically aware redirection, where end users are redirected to their
physically closest replica; least-cost redirection, where end users are directed
to the cheapest replica from the content deployer’s perspective; and QoS-aware
redirection, where end users are directed to replicas that meet certain perfor-
mance criteria, such as response time and throughput.
FIGURE 20.6. Storage providers overlaid onto a Google Map view.
20.3
METACDN: HARNESSING STORAGE CLOUDS
523


The load balancing and redirection mechanism is depicted in Figure 20.7,
for an example scenario where an end user on the East Coast of the United
States wishes to download a ﬁle. The user requests a MetaCDN URL such as
http://www.metacdn.org/MetaCDN/FileMapper?itemid 5 1, and the browser
attempts to resolve the base hostname, www.metacdn.org. The authoritative
DNS (A-DNS) server for this domain resolves this request to the IP address
of the closest copy of the MetaCDN portal—in this case www-na.metacdn.org.
The user (or more typically their Web browser) then makes a HTTP GET
request for the desired content on the MetaCDN gateway. In the case of
geographically aware redirection, the MetaCDN load redirector is triggered to
select the closest replica for the end user, in an effort to maximize performance
and minimize latency. MetaCDN utilizes a geolocation service (mentioned
previously) to ﬁnd the geographical location (latitude and longitude) of the end
user, and it measures their distance from each matching replica using a simple
spherical law of cosines, or a more accurate approach such as the Vincenty
formula for distance between two latitude/longitude points [14], in order to ﬁnd
the closest replica. While there is a strong correlation between the performance
experienced by the end user and their locality to replicas (which was found in
previous work [12, 13] and summarized in Section 20.4), there is no guarantee
that the closest replica is always the best choice, due to cyclical and transient
ﬂuctuations in load on the network path. As such, we intend to investigate the
effectiveness of more sophisticated active measurement approaches such as
CDN-based relative network positioning (CRP) [15], IDMaps [16], or OASIS
[17] to ensure that end users are always directed to the best-performing replica.
MetaCDN end user
Resolve www.metacdn.org
Return IP of closest MetaCDN gateway,
www-na.metacdn.org
GET http://metacdn.org/MetaCDN/FileMapper?itemid=1
HTTP 302 Redirect to
http://metacdn-us-username.s3.amazonaws.com/filename.pdf
GET http://metacdn-us-username.s3.amazonaws.com/filename.pdf
Return replica
Resolve metacdn-us-username.s3.amazonaws.com
Return IP of metacdn-us-username-s3.amazonaws.com
processRequest ()
geoRedirect ()
DNS Server
MetaCDN gateway
Amazon S3 USA
FIGURE 20.7. MetaCDN Load Redirector.
524
BUILDING CONTENT DELIVERY NETWORKS USING CLOUDS


20.4
PERFORMANCE OF THE METACDN OVERLAY
In order to evaluate the potential of using storage cloud providers for content
delivery, in prior work [12, 13] we evaluated the major provider nodes currently
available to us, in order to test the throughput and response time of these data
sources. We also looked at the effectiveness of the MetaCDN overlay in
choosing the most appropriate replica. The ﬁles in these experiments were
deployed by the MetaCDN Allocator, which was instructed to maximize
coverage and performance, and consequently the test ﬁles were deployed on
all available nodes. As noted in the previous section, the default MetaCDN
load redirection policy for this deployment option is to redirect end users to the
physically closest replica. At the time of the ﬁrst experiment, we could utilize
one node in the United States (Seattle, WA) and one node in Ireland (Dublin).
Nirvanix provides two nodes in the United States (both in California), one
node in Singapore, and one node in Germany. The test ﬁles were also cached
where possible using Coral CDN [22]. Coral replicates the ﬁle to participating
Coral proxy nodes on an as-needed basis, depending on where the ﬁle is
accessed. The second experiment included storage nodes offered by Amazon
CloudFront and Rackspace Cloud Files (described in Section 20.2).
For the ﬁrst experiment, we deployed clients in Australia (Melbourne), France
(Sophia Antipolis), Austria (Vienna), the United States (New York and San
Diego), and South Korea (Seoul). Each location had a high-speed connection to
major Internet backbones to minimize the chance of the client being the
bottleneck during this experiment. The experiment was run simultaneously at
each client location over a 24-hour period, during the middle of the week. As the
test spans 24 hours, it experiences localized peak times in each of the geographical
regions. Each hour, the client sequentially downloads each test ﬁle from each
available node a total of 30 times, for statistical signiﬁcance. The ﬁle is down-
loaded using the Unix utility, wget, with the no-cache and no-dns-cache options to
ensure that for each download a fresh ﬁle is always downloaded (and not sourced
from any intermediary cache) and that the DNS lookup is not cached either.
In the interests of brevity, we present a summarized set of results. The ﬁrst
set of results (depicted in Table 20.3) shows the transfer speed to download
each replicated 10-MB test ﬁle from all client locations. The ﬁle is large enough
to have some conﬁdence that a steady-state transfer rate has been achieved. The
second set of results (depicted in Table 20.4) captures the end-to-end response
time when downloading each replica of a 1-kB ﬁle from all client locations.
Due to the size of the ﬁle being negligible, the response time is dominated by the
time taken to look up the DNS record and establish the HTTP connection.
After performing this experiment, we were conﬁdent that cloud storage pro-
viders delivered the necessary raw performance to be utilized for reliable content
delivery. Performance was especially good when there was a high degree of
locality between the client and the replica servers, which was evident from client
nodes in Europe, the United States, and Korea. The client in Australia had
reasonable throughput and response time but would certainly beneﬁt from more
20.4
PERFORMANCE OF THE METACDN OVERLAY
525


localized storage resources. In all, we found the results to be consistent (and in
some cases better) in terms of response time and throughput with previous studies
of dedicated (and costly) content delivery networks [4, 18, 19]. However, further
and longer-term evaluation is needed before we can make any categorical claims.
The second experiment (described in Pathan et al. [13]) tested a number of
different load redirection policies operating in the MetaCDN overlay. The
policies tested were as follows:
 Random (RAN): End users were directed to a random replica.
 Geolocation (GEO): End users were directed to the closest physical replica
(as described in 20.3.4).
 Cost (COST): End users were directed to the cheapest replica.
 Utility aware (UTIL): End users were directed to the replica with the
highest utility, where utility depends on the weighted throughput for
requests, the user-perceived response times from direct replica access and
via MetaCDN, the unit replication cost, and the content size. This policy
is described in detail in Pathan et al. [13].
TABLE 20.4. Average Throughput (KB/s) over 24 Hours from Six Client Locations
S3 US
S3 EU
SDN
#1
SDN
#2
SDN
#3
SDN
#4
Coral
Melbourne, Australia
1.378
1.458
0.663
0.703
1.195
0.816
5.452
Paris, France
0.533
0.2
0.538
0.099
1.078
0.316
3.11
Vienna, Austria
0.723
0.442
0.585
0.099
1.088
0.406
3.171
Seoul, South Korea
1.135
1.21
0.856
0.896
1
0.848
3.318
San Diego, USA
0.232
0.455
0.23
0.361
0.775
0.319
4.655
Secaucus, NJ, USA
0.532
0.491
0.621
0.475
1.263
0.516
1.916
TABLE 20.3. Average Response Time (seconds) over 24 Hours from Six Client
Locations
S3 US
S3 EU
SDN #1 SDN #2
SDN #3 SDN #4
Coral
Melbourne, Australia
264.3
389.1
30
366.8
408.4
405.5
173.7
Paris, France
703.1
2116
483.8
2948
416.8
1042
530.2
Vienna, Austria
490.7
1347
288.4
2271
211
538.7
453.4
Seoul, South Korea
312.8
376.1
466.5
411.8
2456
588.2
152
San Diego, CA, USA
1234
323.5
5946
380.1
506.1
820.4
338.5
Secaucus, NJ, USA
2381
1949
860.8
967.1
572.8
4230
636.4
526
BUILDING CONTENT DELIVERY NETWORKS USING CLOUDS


Measurements were from eight clients in ﬁve continents: Paris (France),
Innsbruck (Austria), and Poznan (Poland) in Europe; Beijing (China) and
Melbourne (Australia) in Asia/Australia; Atlanta, GA, Irvine, CA (USA) in
North America, and Rio de Janeiro (Brazil) in South America. The testing
methodology was identical to the ﬁrst experiment described in this section,
with the exception that the test ran for 48 hours instead of 24. Unsurpris-
ingly in nearly all client locations, the highest throughput was achieved from
end users being redirected to the geographically closest replica (depicted in
Table 20.5). There were instances where this was not the case, such as for the
client in California, suggesting that the closest physical replica did not
necessarily have the best network path, performing worse than random
redirection.
From an end-user perspective, most clients (with the exception of Rio de
Janeiro) perform much worse with a utility policy compared to a geoloca-
tion policy. Given that the utility-aware redirection emphasizes maximizing
MetaCDN’s utility rather than the experience of an individual user, it is
understandable that end-user perceived performance has been sacriﬁced to
some extent. For Rio de Janeiro, the geolocation policy leads to the closest
Rackspace node in the United States, whereas the utility-aware redirection
results in a higher-utility replica, which is Amazon’s node in the United States.
In this instance, Amazon’s node betters the Rackspace node in terms of its
service capability, network path, internal overlay routing, and request trafﬁc
strain, which are captured by the utility calculation metric used.
20.5
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
MetaCDN is currently under active testing and development and is rapidly
evolving. Additional storage cloud resources are rapidly coming online now
and in the near future, improving performance and expanding the coverage
footprint of MetaCDN further. Rackspace’s storage cloud offering, Cloud
Files, has recently launched, while Amazon has expanded their content delivery
footprint to additional locations in the United States, Europe, and Asia via
their CloudFront service. Microsoft has also ofﬁcially launched their cloud
storage offering, Azure Storage Service. MetaCDN was rapidly updated to
support each of these new services as they formally launched. Due to the
TABLE 20.5. Average Throughput (kB/sec) over 48 Hours from Eight Client Locations
Atlanta,
USA
California,
USA
Beijing,
China
Melbourne,
Australia
Rio,
Brazil
Vienna,
Austria
Poznan,
Poland
Paris,
France
RAN
6170
4412
281
3594
800
2033
7519
1486
GEO
6448
2757
229
6519
521
2192
9008
2138
COST
3275
471
117
402
1149
523
1740
265
UTIL
3350
505
177
411
1132
519
1809
280
20.5
FUTURE DIRECTIONS
527


ﬂexible and adaptable nature of MetaCDN, it is well-poised to support any
changes in existing storage cloud services as well as incorporating support for
new providers as they appear.
However, it is likely that many locations on the so-called “edges” of the
Internet may not have local storage cloud facilities available to them for some
time, or any time in the foreseeable future. So far, most storage cloud
infrastructure has been located in Europe, North America, and Asia. However,
MetaCDN users can supplement these “black spots” by adding storage for
commercial shared hosting providers (available in most countries) as well as
privately run Web hosting facilities thanks to the MetaCDN connectors for
FTP, SCP/SSH, and WebDAV accessible Web hosting providers. These non-
cloud providers can be seamlessly integrated into a MetaCDN user’s resource
pool and utilized by the MetaCDN system, increasing the footprint of the
MetaCDN service and improving the experience of end users via increased
locality of ﬁle replicas in these areas.
In future work we intend to better harness the usage and quality of service
(QoS) metrics that the system records in order to make the MetaCDN system
truly autonomic, improving the utility for content deployers and end users.
MetaCDN tracks the usage of content deployed using the service at the
content and replica level, tracking the number of times that replicas are
downloaded and the last access time of each replica. We intend to harness this
information to optimize the management of deployed content, expanding the
deployment when and where it is needed to meet increases in demand (which
are tracked by MetaCDN). Conversely, we can remove under-utilized replicas
during quiet periods in order to minimize cost while still meeting a baseline
QoS level. From the end-users (consumers) perspective, we have expanded
the QoS tracking to include data gathered from probes or agents deployed
across the Internet to improve end-users’ experience. These agents operate at
a variety of geographically disparate locations, tracking the performance
(response time, throughput, reliability) they experienced from their locale
when downloading replicas from each available coverage location. This infor-
mation is reported back to their closest MetaCDN gateway. Such information
can assist the MetaCDN load redirector in making QoS-aware redirections,
because the client’s position can be mapped to that of a nearby agent in order
to approximate the performance they will experience when downloading
from speciﬁc coverage locations. As mentioned in Section 20.3.4, we are also
investigating other active measurement approaches for QoS-aware client
redirection.
20.6
CONCLUSION
The recent emergence of “storage cloud” providers has tantalized content
creators with content storage and delivery capabilities that were previously
only obtainable by those who could afford expensive content delivery
528
BUILDING CONTENT DELIVERY NETWORKS USING CLOUDS


networks (CDNs), such as Akamai and Mirror Image. However, they can be
daunting to use for non-developers, as each service is best utilized via speciﬁc
web services or programmer APIs, and have their own unique quirks.
Furthermore, these “storage cloud” providers are merely basic storage
services, and they do not offer the capabilities of a fully featured CDN
such as intelligent replica placement, automatic replication, failover, load
redirection, and load balancing. In this chapter we presented MetaCDN, a
simple, general-purpose, reusable service that allows content creators to
leverage the services of multiple “storage cloud” providers as a uniﬁed
CDN. MetaCDN makes it trivial for content creators and consumers to
harness the performance and coverage of such providers by offering a single
uniﬁed namespace that makes it easy to integrate into origin Web sites, and it
is transparent for end users. We have found that the performance of the
MetaCDN service (and the “storage clouds” it utilizes) is compelling enough
to utilize as a platform for high-performance, low-cost content delivery for
content producers and consumers. Up-to-date information on MetaCDN can
be found at http://www.metacdn.org.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by Australian Research Council (ARC) as part of the
Discovery Grant “Coordinated and Cooperative Load Sharing between Con-
tent Delivery Networks” (DP0881742, 20082010). Thanks go to past and
present students who have worked on or with the MetaCDN system; Yudong
Li, Mukaddim Pathan, Qiao Zhao, Derick Carvalho, Kushal Thirthappa,
Anshul Chopra, Nagendran Mysore Balasubramanya, Ghayathiri Subbrama-
niam, Jinglian Geng, Wei Qiu, and Joko Parmiyanto. Finally, thanks also go to
Professor Zahir Tari and Professor Rajkumar Buyya for their constructive
feedback on the project. This chapter is partially derived from earlier publica-
tions [12, 13, 20, 21].
REFERENCES
1.
J. Broberg, S. Venugopal, and R. Buyya, Market-oriented grids and utility
computing: The state-of-the-art and future directions, Journal of Grid Computing,
6(3):255276, 2008.
2.
New Dream Network LLC, Web Hosting by DreamHost, http://www.dreamhost.
com, 20/4/2010.
3.
B. Maggs and A. Technologies. Global internet content delivery, in Proceedings of
First IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Cluster Computing and the Grid,
Brisbane, Australia, May 1518, 2001, p. 12.
4.
A. Su, D. Choffnes, A. Kuzmanovic, and F. Bustamante, Drafting behind Akamai
(travelocity-based detouring), ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review,
36(4):435446, 2006.
REFERENCES
529


5.
M. Pathan and R. Buyya, A taxonomy of CDNs, in Content Delivery Networks,
Springer, Berlin, 2008, pp. 3378.
6.
D. Rayburn, CDN pricing: Costs for outsourced video delivery, in Streaming Media
West: The Business and Technology of Online Video, September 2008.
7.
J. Elson and J. Howell, Handling ﬂash crowds from your garage, in Proceedings of
the 2008 USENIX Annual Technical Conference, Boston, Massachusetts, June
2227, 2008.
8.
D. Gottfrid, Self-service, prorated super computing fun! OPEN: All the code that is
ﬁt to printf(), http://open.nytimes.com/2007/11/01/self-service-prorated-super-com-
puting-fun/, 1/11/2007.
9.
D. MacAskill, Scalability: Set Amazon’s Servers on Fire, Not Yours, in ETech 2007:
O’Reilly Emerging Technology Conference, 2007.
10.
M. Palankar, A. Iamnitchi, M. Ripeanu and S. Garﬁnkel. Amazon S3 for Science
grids: a viable solution?, in Proceedings of the 2008 international workshop on Data-
aware distributed computing, Boston, MA, USA, pp. 5564, 2008.
11.
A. I. Matei Ripeanu. S4: A simple storage service for sciences, in Proceedings of
16th IEEE International Symposium on High Performance Distributed Computing—
Hot Topics Track, California, USA, June 2729, 2007.
12.
J. Broberg, R. Buyya, and Z. Tari, MetaCDN: Harnessing ‘Storage Clouds’ for
high performance content delivery, Journal of Network and Computer Applications,
32(5):10121022, 2009.
13.
M. Pathan, J. Broberg, and R. Buyya, Maximizing utility for content delivery
clouds, in Proceedings of 10th International Conference on Web Information
Systems Engineering (WISE 2009), LNCS 5802, Poznan, Poland, October 57,
2009, pp. 1328.
14.
T. Vincenty, Direct and inverse solutions of geodesics on the ellipsoid with
application of nested equations, Survey Review, 22(176):8893, 1975.
15.
A.-J. Su, D. Choffnes, F. E. Bustamante, and A. Kuzmanovic, Relative network
positioning via CDN redirections, in Proceedings of International Conference on
Distributed Computing Systems (ICDCS 2008), Beijing, China, June 1720, 2008,
pp. 377386.
16.
P. Francis, S. Jamin, C. Jin, Y. Jin, D. Raz, Y. Shavitt, and L. Zhang, Idmaps: A
global internet host distance estimation service, IEEE/ACM Transactions on
Networking, 9(5):525540, 2001.
17.
M. J. Freedman, K. Lakshminarayanan, and D. Mazieres, Oasis: Anycast for any
service, in Proceedings of the 3rd Symposium on Networked Systems Design and
Implementation, San Jose, CA, May 810, 2006.
18.
K. Johnson, J. Carr, M. Day, and M. Kaashoek, The measured performance of
content distribution networks. Computer Communications, 24(2):202206, 2001.
19.
A.-J. Su and A. Kuzmanovic, Thinning Akamai, in Proceedings of the 8th ACM
SIGCOMM conference on Internet measurement, Vouliagmeni, Greece, 2008, pp.
2942.
20.
J. Broberg and Z. Tari, MetaCDN: Harnessing storage clouds for high perfor-
mance content delivery, in Proceedings of The Sixth International Conference on
Service-Oriented Computing [Demonstration Paper] (ICSOC 2008), LNCS 5364,
Sydney, Australia, December, 2008, pp. 730731.
530
BUILDING CONTENT DELIVERY NETWORKS USING CLOUDS


21.
J. Broberg, R. Buyya, and Z. Tari, Creating a ‘cloud storage’ mashup for high
performance, low cost content delivery, in Proceedings of The Sixth International
Conference on Service-Oriented Computing Workshops, LNCS 5472, Sydney,
Australia, December 2009, pp. 178183.
22.
M. Freedman, E. Freudenthal, et al. Democratizing Content Publication with
Coral, in Proceedings of the 1st ACM Symposium on Networked Systems Design
and Implementation, San Francisco, California, March 2931, 2004.
23.
Jungle Disk Inc., Jungle Disk: Reliable Online Storage Powered by Amazon S3,
http://www.jungledisk.com, 20/4/2010.
REFERENCES
531


CHAPTER 21
RESOURCE CLOUD MASHUPS
LUTZ SCHUBERT, MATTHIAS ASSEL, ALEXANDER KIPP, and STEFAN
WESNER
21.1
INTRODUCTION
Outsourcing computation and/or storage away from the local infrastructure is
not a new concept itself: Already the grid and Web service domain presented
(and uses) concepts that allow integration of remote resource for seemingly
local usage. Nonetheless, the introduction of the cloud concept via such
providers as Amazon proved to be a much bigger success than, for example,
Platform’s Grid Support [1]—or at least a much more visible success. However,
the conﬁguration and management overhead of grids greatly exceeds one of the
well-known cloud providers and therefore encourages, in particular, average
users to use the system. Furthermore, clouds address an essential economical
factor, namely, elastic scaling according to need, thereby theoretically reducing
unnecessary resource loads.
Cloud systems are thereby by no means introducing a new technology—just
the opposite in fact, because many of the initial cloud providers simply opened
their existing infrastructure to the customers and thus exploited their respective
proprietary solutions. Implicitly, the offered services and hence the according
API are speciﬁc to the service provider and can not be used in other environ-
ments. This, however, poses major issues for customers, as well as for future
providers.
Interoperability and Vendor Lock-In. Since most cloud offerings are pro-
prietary, customers adopting the according services or adapting their respective
applications to these environments are implicitly bound to the respective
Cloud Computing: Principles and Paradigms,
Edited by Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg and
Andrzej Goscinski
Copyright r 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
533


provider. Movement between providers is restricted by the effort the user wants
to vest into porting the capabilities to another environment, implying in most
cases reprogramming of the according applications. This makes the user
dependent not only on the provider’s decisions, but also on his/her failures:
As the example of the Google crash on the May 14, 2009 [2] showed, relying too
much on a speciﬁc provider can lead to serious problems with service
consumption [3].
This example also shows how serious problems can arise for the respective
provider regarding his market position, in particular if he/she makes certain
quality guarantees with the service provided—that is, is contractually obliged
to ensure provisioning. Even the cloud-based Google App Engine experiences
recurring downtimes, making the usage of the applications unreliable and thus
reducing uptake unnecessarily [46].
Since the solutions and systems are proprietary, neither customer nor provider
can cross the boundary of the infrastructure and can thus not compensate the
issues by making use of additional external resources. However, since providers
who have already established a (comparatively strong) market position fear
competition, the success of standardization attempts, such as the Open Cloud
Manifesto [7], is still dubious [8]. On the other hand, new cloud providers
too would proﬁt from such standards, because it would allow them to offer
competitive products.
In this chapter we will elaborate the means necessary to bring together cloud
infrastructures so as to allow customers a transparent usage across multiple cloud
providers while maintaining the interests of the individual business entities
involved. As will be shown, interoperability is only one of the few concerns
besides information security, data privacy, and trustworthiness in bridging cloud
boundaries, and particular challenges are posed by data management and
scheduling. We will thereby focus speciﬁcally on storage (data) clouds, because
they form the basis for more advanced features related to provisioning of full
computational environments, be that as infrastructure, platform, or service.
21.1.1
A Need for Cloud Mashups
Obviously by integrating multiple cloud infrastructures into a single platform,
reliability and scalability is extended by the degree of the added system(s).
Platform as a Service (PaaS) providers often offer specialized capabilities to their
users via a dedicated API, such as Google App Engine providing additional
features for handling (Google) documents, and MS Azure is focusing particularly
on deployment and provisioning of Web services, and so on. Through aggrega-
tion of these special features, additional, extended capabilities can be achieved
(given a certain degree of interoperability), ranging from extended storage
and computation facilities (IaaS) to combined functions, such as analytics and
functionalities. The Cloud Computing Expert Working Group refers to such
integrated cloud systems with aggregated capabilities across the individual
infrastructures as Meta-Clouds and Meta-Services, respectively [9].
534
RESOURCE CLOUD MASHUPS


It can be safely assumed that functionalities of cloud systems will specialize
even further in the near future, thus exploiting dedicated knowledge and
expertise in the target area. This is not only attractive for new clientele of that
respective domain, but may also come as a natural evolution from supporting
recurring customers better in their day-to-day tasks (e.g., Google’s ﬁnancial
services [10]). While there is no “general-purpose platform (as a service),”
aggregation could increase the capability scope of individual cloud systems, thus
covering a wider range of customers and requirements; this follows the same
principle as in service composition [11].
The following two use cases may exemplify this feature and its speciﬁc
beneﬁt in more detail.
User-Centric Clouds. Most cloud provisioning is user- and context-agnostic;
in other words, the user will always get the same type of service, access route,
and so on. As clouds develop into application platforms (see, e.g., MS Azure
[12] and the Google Chrome OS [13]), context such as user device properties or
location becomes more and more relevant: Device types designate the execu-
tion capabilities (even if remote), their connectivity requirements and restric-
tions, and the location [14]. Each of these aspects has a direct impact on how
the cloud needs to handle data and application location, communication, and
so on. Single cloud providers can typically not handle such a wide scope
of requirements, because they are in most cases bound to a speciﬁc location
and sometimes even to speciﬁc application and/or device models. As of the end
of 2008, even Amazon did not host data centers all across the world, so
that speciﬁc local requirements of Spain, for example, could not be explicitly
met [15].
By offering such capabilities across cloud infrastructures, the service
provider will be able to support, in particular, mobile users in a better way.
Similar issues and beneﬁts apply as for roaming. Along the same way, the
systems need to be able to communicate content and authentication informa-
tion to allow users to connect equally from any location. Notably, legislation
and contractual restrictions may prevent unlimited data replication, access, and
shifting between locations.
Multimedia Streaming. The tighter the coupling between user and the appli-
cation/service in the cloud, the more complicated the maintenance of the data
connectivity—even more so if data are combined from different sources so as to
build up new information sets or offer enhanced media experiences. In such cases,
not only the location of the user matters in order to ensure availability of data, but
also the combination features offered by a third-party aggregator and its relative
location.
In order to maintain and provide data as a stream, the platform provider
must furthermore ensure that data availability is guaranteed without disrup-
tions. In addition to the previous use case, this implies that not only data
location is reallocated dynamically according to the elasticity paradigm [9, 16],
21.1
INTRODUCTION
535
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>


but also the data stream—potentially taking the user context into consideration
again.
Enhanced media provisioning is a growing ﬁeld of interest for more and
more market players. Recently, Amazon has extended its storage capabilities
(Amazon S3) with Wowza Media Systems so as to offer liver streams over the
cloud [17], and OnLive is currently launching a service to provide gaming as
media streams over the Web by exploiting cloud scalability [18]. While large
companies create and aggregate information in-house, in particular new business
entries rely on existing data providers so as to compose their new information
set(s) [19, 20].
Such business entities must hence not only aggregate information in poten-
tially a user-speciﬁc way, but also identify the best sources, handle the streams of
these sources, and redirect them according to user context. We can thereby
assume that the same strategies as for user-centric clouds are employed.
21.2
CONCEPTS OF A CLOUD MASHUP
Cloud mashups can be realized in many different ways, just as they can cover
differing scopes, depending on their actual purpose [2123]. Most current
considerations thereby assume that the deﬁnition of standard interfaces and
protocols will ensure interoperability between providers, thus allowing con-
sumers to control and use different existing cloud systems in a coherent fashion.
In theory, this will enable SOA (Service-oriented Architecture)-like composi-
tion of capabilities by integrating the respective functions into meta-capabilities
that can act across various cloud systems/platforms/infrastructures [9].
21.2.1
The Problem of Interoperability
The Web service domain has already shown that interoperability cannot be readily
achieved through the deﬁnition of common interfaces or speciﬁcations [9]:
 The standardization process is too slow to capture the development in
academy and industry.
 Speciﬁcations (as predecessors to standards) tend to diverge quickly with
the standardization process being too slow.
 “Competing” standardization bodies with different opinions prefer
different speciﬁcations.
 And so on.
What is more, clouds typically do not expose interfaces in the same way as
Web services, so interoperability on this level is not the only obstacle to
overcome. With the main focus of cloud-based services being “underneath” the
536
RESOURCE CLOUD MASHUPS


typical Web service level—that is, more related to resources and platforms—
key interoperability issues relate to compatible data structures, related
programming models, interoperable operating images, and so on. Thus, to
realize a mashup requires at least:
 A compatible API/programming model, respectively an engine that can
parse the APIs of the cloud platforms to be combined (PaaS).
 A compatible virtual machine, respectively an image format that all
according cloud infrastructures can host (IaaS).
 Interoperable or transferrable data structures that can be interpreted by
all engines and read by all virtual machines involved. This comes as a side
effect to the compatibility aspects mentioned above.
Note that services offered on top of a cloud (SaaS) do indeed pose classical
Web-service-related interoperability issues, where the actual interface needs to
provide identical or at least similar methods to allow provider swapping on-the-
ﬂy [24, 25].
By addressing interoperability from bottom up—that is, from an infra-
structure layer ﬁrst—resources in a PaaS and SaaS cloud mashup could
principally shift the whole image rather than the service/module. In other
words, the actual programming engine running on the PaaS cloud, respectively
the software exposed as services, could be shifted within an IaaS cloud as
complete virtual machines (cf. Figure 21.1), given that all resources can read the
according image format. In other words, virtualize the data center’s resources
including the appropriate system (platform or service engine) and thus create
a virtual cloud environment rather than a real one. Amazon already provides
virtual rather than true machines, so as to handle the user’s environment in a
scalable fashion [26].
While this sounds like a simple general-purpose solution, this approach is
obviously overly simpliﬁed, because actual application will pose a set of
obstacles:
Software
Applications
and Services
APIs and
Engines
Hardware,
Storage
Platform
Image
Infrastructure
Replicated
Server
Virtual
Services
Virtual
Engine
Scale out
Scale out
Scale out
FIGURE 21.1. Encapsulated virtual environments.
21.2
CONCEPTS OF A CLOUD MASHUP
537


 Most platform engines and services currently offered are based on proprie-
tary environments and are constructed so as to shift the status rather than
the full software. In other words, not the full software or engine is replicated,
but rather only the information relevant to execute the tasks—typically, the
engine or the base software will be preinstalled on all servers, thus reducing
the scaling overhead.
 Moving/replicating an image including the data takes more bandwidth
and time than moving a potentially very small applet.
 The size requirements of an image are less easily adapted than that of an
applet/service; in other words, an image occupies more space more
statically.
 This is particularly true, if the same engine can be used for multiple applets
at the same time, as is generally the case; by default, each image will serve
only one customer, thus increasing space requirement exponentially.
 Distributed applications and (data) links between them are more difﬁcult
to handle across images than in environments speciﬁcally laid out for that.
 The logic for scaling behavior is typically implemented in the engine or
service sandbox, rather than in the underlying infrastructure; because not
in all cases of service scaling does the image need to be scaled out, the logic
differs quite essentially.
As has been noted, to achieve interoperability on the infrastructure layer has
completely different implications than trying to realize interoperability on any
higher layers. In fact, interoperability would imply that all images are identical
in structure, which is generally not the case. With different well-established
virtualization solutions (Xen, VMWare, HyperV, etc.) there exists a certain
degree of defacto standards, yet at the cost of bad convertibility between them.
Notably, there do exist efforts to standardize the virtual machine image format,
too, such as the Open Virtualization Format (OVF) [27] which is supported by
most of the virtualization solutions and as of 2009 even by a dedicated cloud
computing platform [28]. Nonetheless, in all cases a converter is necessary to
actually execute the transformation, and the resulting image may not always
work correctly (e.g., [40]).
The main obstacles thus remain in performance issues, resource cost (with a
virtual image consuming more resources than a small engine or even applet),
and manageability. These are still main reasons why more storage providers
than computational providers exist, even though the number of computing
IaaS hosts continually grows, as cloud systems reduce the effort for the
administration.
However, it may be noted that an image can host the engine, respectively
the necessary service environment, thus leaving the cloud to handle the
applets and services in a similar fashion to the PaaS and SaaS approach. This
requires, however, that data, application, and image are treated in a new
fashion.
538
RESOURCE CLOUD MASHUPS


21.2.2
Intelligent Image Handling
A straightforward cloud environment management system would replicate any
hosted system in a different location the moment the resources become insufﬁ-
cient—for example, when too many users access the system concurrently and
execute a load balance between the two locations. Similarly, an ideal system would
down-scale the replicated units once the resource load is reduced again. However,
what is being replicated differs between cloud types and as such requires different
handling. As noted, in the IaaS clouds, images and datasets are typically replicated
as whole, leading to performance issues during replication; what is more, in
particular in the case of storage clouds, not the full dataset may be required in all
locations (see next section). As opposed to this, applets in a PaaS environment
are typically re-instantiated independent of the environment, because it can be
safely assumed that the appropriate engine (and so on) is already made available
in other locations.
In order to treat any cloud type as essentially an infrastructure environ-
ment, the system requires additional information about how to segment the
exposed service(s) and thus how to replicate it (them). Implicitly, the system
needs to be aware of the environment available in other locations. In order to
reduce full replication overhead, resources that already host most of the
environment should be preferred over “clean slate” ones—which may lead to
serious scheduling issues if, for example, a more widely distributed environ-
ment occupies the resource where a less frequently accessed service is hosted,
but due to recent access rates, the latter gets more attention (and so on).
In this chapter, we will assume though that such a scheduling mechanism
exists.
Segmenting the Service. Any process exploiting the capabilities of the cloud
essentially consists of the following parts: the user-speciﬁc data (state), the
scalable application logic, the not-scalable underlying engine or supporting
logic, the central dataset, and the execution environment (cf. Figure 21.3).
Notably there may be overlaps between these elements; for example, the engine
and execution environment may be quite identical as is the case with the
Internet Information Service and the typical Windows installation.
The general behavior consists in instantiating a new service per requestor,
along with the respective state dataset, until the resource exceeds its capabilities
(bandwidth, memory, etc.) and a new resource is required to satisfy availability.
Note that in the case of shared environments, such as Google Documents, the
dataset may not be replicated each time. In a PaaS and a SaaS cloud, each
resource already hosts the environment necessary to execute the customer’s
service(s)—for example, in Google Docs, the Google App Engine, and so on—
so that they can be instantiated easily on any other machine in the cloud
environment. This replication requires not only moving a copy of the customer-
speciﬁc application logic, but also the base dataset associated with it. New
instances can now grow on this machine like on the ﬁrst resource. In the case of
21.2
CONCEPTS OF A CLOUD MASHUP
539


IaaS platforms, the general scaling behavior tends toward replicating the whole
image or consumer-speciﬁc dataset in new resources (cf. Figure 21.2).
In order to allow infrastructure clouds to handle (platform) services in a
(more) efﬁcient manner, the management system must be able to identify which
parts are needed and can be replicated in order to scale out, respectively
which ones can and should be destroyed during scale-down; for example, it
would not be sensible to destroy the whole image if only one user (of many) logs
out from the machine.
Life Cycle of a Segmented Cloud Image. With segmented main services in
an IaaS environment, the system can now scale up and down in a (more)
efﬁcient manner across several resource providers: Any service requires that its
base environment is available on the machines it gets replicated to. In essence,
this means the virtual machine image—yet more particularly this involves all
“non scalable” parts, such as execution/hosting engine and central dataset. Any
services, applications, or applets normally scaled out can essentially be scaled
out in the virtual environment just like a real environment. To this end, the
virtual machines need to be linked to each other in the same fashion as if
the engines would be hosted on physical machines.
As soon as the hosted engine wants to scale beyond the boundaries of the
local machine, a new physical machine has to be identiﬁed ready to host
the new instances—in the simplest case, another machine will already prov-
ide the respective hosting image. More likely, however, other machines with the
same image will be blocked or will simply not host the image—in these cases, a
new resource must be identiﬁed to upload the base image to. The base image
App
let
Data Set
Data
Data
Engine
Engine
Infrastructure
Infrastructure
Scale out
Scale out
ut
App
let
App
let
App
let
2
1
3
4
5
Applications
and Services
Image1
Collaboration
Resource limitations (e.g. memory)
New Image
APIs and
Engines
Hardware,
Storage
FIGURE 21.2. Hierarchical scale out in an encapsulated, virtual cloud environment.
540
RESOURCE CLOUD MASHUPS


thereby consists (in particular) of all nonscalable, not user-speciﬁc information
to allow for new user instances; it must thereby be respected that different scale-
outs can occur, depending also on the usage type of the cloud (see below).
21.2.3
Intelligent Data Management
Next to the segmentation of the image, management of the amount of data and
thus the distribution in particular during replication (i.e., scale out) is a major
challenge for future cloud systems—not alone because the digital contents will
exceed the capacity of today’s storage capabilities, and data are growing
extremely rapidly and even faster than the bandwidth and the processing power
of modern computer systems, too [29]. Implicitly and at the same time the size of
single datasets increase irresistibly and obviously faster than networks and
platforms can deal with. In particular, analysis and search of data is getting
more and more time- and power-consuming [30]—as such, applications that
require only part of the data typically have to handle the full dataset(s) ﬁrst.
Much research in the ﬁeld of efﬁcient data management for large-scale
environments has been done recently. The Hadoop Distributed File System
(HDFS) [31], the Google File System (GFS) [32], or Microsoft’s Dryad/SCOPE
[33], for instance, provide highly fault-tolerant virtual ﬁle systems on top of the
physical one, which enable high-throughput access of large datasets within
distributed (cluster) environments. However, with all these efforts, there is still a
big gap between the meaningful structure and annotation of ﬁle/data contents
and the appropriate distribution of particular ﬁle/data chunks throughout the
environment; that is, ﬁles are more or less randomly partitioned into smaller
pieces (blocks) and spread across several machines without explicitly considering
the context and requirements, respectively, of certain users/applications and thus
their interest in different parts of particular datasets only.
To overcome this obstacle, the currently used random segmentation and
distribution of data ﬁles need to be replaced by a new strategy which takes (1) the
semantic contents of the datasets and (2) the requirements of users/applications
into account (i.e., data shall be distributed according to the interest in the data/
information). For this reason, users, devices, and applications need to be
modeled by capturing relevant context parameters (e.g., the actual position
and network properties) as well as analyzing application states with respect to
upcoming data retrieval and/or processing needs [34]. In addition, storage
resources, platforms, and infrastructures (i.e., entire virtual images) shall also
be continuously monitored, so as to react on sudden bottlenecks immediately.
While broadcasting such relevant information (actual user and resource needs)—
not frequently but in fact as soon as new requirements essentially differ from
previous ones—among infrastructure and platform providers, necessary data
could be replicated and stored sensibly near to the consumption point, so as to
reduce bottlenecks and to overcome latency problems. Apart from distributing
entire data records, this concept would also allow for segmenting large amounts
of data more accurately by just releasing the relevant portion of the dataset only.
21.2
CONCEPTS OF A CLOUD MASHUP
541


Assuming that certain parts of a database or ﬁle are more interesting than others
(obtained from access statistics or user preferences), these subsets could be, for
instance, extracted and replicated at the most frequently visited site as applied in
content delivery networks for quite a long time [35] in order to improve scalability
and performance of certain resources, too. Particular mechanisms (as applied
in traditional service-oriented architectures) both on user and provider sites
need to guarantee that running applications/workﬂows are still retrieving the
correct pieces of data while shifting them among different platforms, infrastruc-
tures, and/or locations (e.g., Berbner et al. [36]). This redeployment should be
completely transparent for users; they should be unaware if accessing the virtual
resource X or Y as long as security, privacy, and legal issues are respected.
Theoretically, two alternatives might be considered to realize the efﬁcient
distribution of interesting datasets. First of all, in case of underperforming
resources (e.g., due to limited bandwidth) and of course depending on the size of
data/contents, providers could think of duplicating the entire virtual resource
(image). This concept is similar to known load-balancing strategies [37] being
applied if the access load of a single machine exceeds its own capacities and
multiple instances of the same source are required to process requests accord-
ingly. However, this only makes sense if local data sizes are larger than the size of
the complete virtual image. The second option generally applies for large datasets
which are permanently requested and accessed and, thus, exceeding the entire
capacity of a single resource. In that case, the datasets might be transferred closer
toward the user(s) (insofar as possible) in order to overcome latency problems by
replicating the most relevant parts or at least the minimal required ones onto a
second instance of the same virtual image (the same type of engine) which not
necessarily runs on the same infrastructure as the original one. The latter case
could yield to so-called virtual swarms (a cluster of resources of closely related
data) among which datasets are actively and continuously exchanged and/or
replicated. These swarms could furthermore help to speed up the handling of
large ﬁles in terms of discovery and processing and might enhance the quality
of results, too.
21.3
REALIZING RESOURCE MASHUPS
In order to realize efﬁcient cloud mashups on an infrastructure level, distrib-
uted data and segmented image management have to be combined in order to
handle the additional size created by virtualizing the machine (i.e., by handling
images instead of applets and services). As noted above, we can distinguish
between the base image set consisting of (a) the setup environment and any
engine (if required), (b) the base dataset that may be customer-speciﬁc (but not
user-speciﬁc), such as general data that are provided to the user, but also and
more importantly the applet or service base that is provided to each user
equally, and (c) the user-speciﬁc information which may differ per access and
which may only be available on a single machine.
542
RESOURCE CLOUD MASHUPS


Scale-out behavior now depends on the type of application/cloud service
running (Figure 21.3).
IaaS Provisioning. Infrastructures are typically provided in the form of an
image containing the full computational environment or consist of a dynamic
dataset, which is typically made available to all users equally. Scaling out involves
either replication of the image/data set (horizontal scaling) or increasing the
available storage size (vertical scale). Horizontal scaling thereby typically implies
that the full dataset is replicated, while vertical scaling may lead to data
segmentation and distribution.
However, as noted in the preceding section, different users may require
different parts of the data, so that replication of the whole dataset every time
the machine boundaries become insufﬁcient may not be necessary, thus saving
bandwidth and storage.
SaaS Provisioning. Unlike the typical charts related to the complexity of
cloud types, Software as a Service (SaaS) does pose fewer issues on an
infrastructure than does Platform provisioning. This is mostly because pro-
vided services scale-out simply by instantiating new services and state data. In
most cases, the base environment for SaaS cloud types is fairly simple and can
be (re)used for various different processes—for example, a .NET environment
with IIS as a hosting engine.
Implicitly, several resources in the cloud environment can host the base
image and allow different SaaS customers to make use of these machines. In
other words, machines with the respective compatible base image (e.g., hosting
PaaS
SaaS
User Data
IaaS
Base Image
Base Dataset
(Base) Services
Applet
necessitates
necessitates
FIGURE 21.3. The relationship between IaaS, SaaS, and PaaS during scaling.
21.3
REALIZING RESOURCE MASHUPS
543


a compatible IIS component) can host the replicated service instances, rather
than having to duplicate the full image all the time. Notably, when no machine
with a compatible base image is available anymore, a new resource has to be
loaded with an image that meets the current scale-out requirements best. These
may not be deﬁned by a single service alone, but by multiple concurrent
processes that have similar and opposing requirements. The same principles as
for intelligent data management may be applied here, too. However, the
maintenance of replicated datasets in SaaS environments requires more efforts
and carefulness because synchronization between multiple instances of the
same dataset on the same image might result in inconsistent states, and thus
supervision of duplicated data sets is highly recommended. Particular services
as applied in Microsoft’s Live Mesh [38] could help taking control over this.
PaaS Provisioning. The most complex case with respect to instance manage-
ment, and hence with respect to elasticity, consists in Platform as a Service
provisioning: In this case, multiple different sets have to be managed during
scale-out, depending on the original cause to increase the resource load. We can
distinguish between the following triggers with this respect: (1) The number of
customers exceeds the resource limits or (2) the number of users leads to resource
problems. The actual content being replicated differs between these two cases:
When another customer wants to host more applets than the resource can
manage, the additional applet will be instantiated on a new resource that
executes the relevant base image (see also SaaS Provisioning above). In case no
such machine exists, the backed-up base image can be used to instantiate a new
resource or a running image is duplicated without customer and user-speciﬁc
data. This can be effectively considered horizontal scalability [39].
In case, however, a customer’s applet is taking away more resources than
available due to too many users accessing the applet, respectively the appro-
priate data, a scale-out needs to replicate also the customer-speciﬁc data and
code. This way, the new machine will have the full environment required from
the user perspective.
21.3.1
Distributed Decision Making
The main management task for maintaining IaaS platforms for resource
mashups hence consists in deciding which parts of image and data to replicate,
which ones to duplicate, and which ones to retain. As discussed in the preceding
sections, such information must be provided by and with the provisioning type
and the appropriate usage of the cloud system.
A particular issue to be addressed in this context consists, however, in the
distributed nature of the environment and hence of decision making: In
particular, in a cloud mashup, no single instance will control all resources
and the corresponding distribution of services, applets, and images across them;
instead one will ﬁnd replications of the same image in various cloud
544
RESOURCE CLOUD MASHUPS


infrastructures (cf. above). Implicitly, during scale-out (and scale-down), only
the requirements and restrictions of the local instance can be considered in the
classical setup. For example, the original resource leading to scale out may have
been freed again, respectively the amount of instances hosted in the appropriate
platform environment may have been reduced—with the original contractual
bindings and requirements by the according customer, the replicated instances
should be reassigned to the original resource or at least the next scale-put
should consider the previous hosts in order to reduce the average resource load
of a customer and thus the corresponding data consumption, license implica-
tions, security relationships, and so on. Obviously, data relationships and
access requirements also play a vital role in this decision (see Section 21.2.3).
It is hence difﬁcult to make best use of deployed instances, let alone of
shared consumer environments, due to the distributed nature of cloud mashup
hosting. Ideally, decisions are hence made from the original instance, or at least
informing related instances of the accompanying decisions so as to maintain a
resource network that can be used to ensure coherence and consistency
(cf. above). In all cases, the mashup should maintain the relationship informa-
tion between customers, instances, users, and data (according to the differ-
entiation introduced above).
21.4
CONCLUSIONS
We have shown in this chapter that essentially all cloud systems can be reduced
to an (enhanced) Infrastructure as a Service environment or resource cloud
with additional segmentation capabilities over its contents, respectively the
functionalities it provides.
21.4.1
Applying Resource Mashups
Turning back to our previously introduced use cases, one will notice that in
particular the overall structure of decision making and data/image distribution
takes a user-centric approach whereby relationships between customers and
users and their data requirements are respected so as to ensure availability while
maintaining scale restrictions. Section 21.2.3 already indicated how data
segmentation and distribution strategies are employed to reduce the access
delay between user(s) and (common) datasets. As data are replicated according
to the scaling behavior, concurrent availability from multiple sites is guaranteed
as long as scaling and segmentation do not move a currently accessed dataset—
in either case, preemptive caching of data needs to be employed to guarantee
handover. In other words, by analyzing user behavior (data consumption) in
the same way as for data segmentation, speciﬁc requirements can be assessed
before the user environment is passed to a new host. Prior to a potential
redirecting of the user’s access route, the availability of next required datasets
(and the environment to provide the data) needs to be ensured—only after
21.4
CONCLUSIONS
545


successful rerouting the initial dataset may be destroyed (i.e., after a move). It is
furthermore recommended to cache data at the recipient side, which is common
procedure in stream handling these days.
21.4.2
Beneﬁts and Obstacles
It is obvious from what has been described above that the main beneﬁt of a
resource mashup consists in an implicit interoperability across infrastructure
providers with little additional effort. Nonetheless, the solution is avoiding the
actual issue regarding interoperability between providers, as it shifts the problem
to a ﬂexible infrastructure management; however, as noted, interoperability
through standardization and enforcing commonalities between providers is not a
realistic or feasible solution.
The big advantage of a resource mashup as described above consists in
respecting the vendors’ desires to maintain their individual environments while
allowing them to scale beyond the restrictions of their infrastructure and providing
enhanced capabilities to customers and users. At the same time, however, such an
arrangement implies that the platform owners have to share part of the income, as
well as having to rely on other providers while the user would automatically blame
the main provider. On the other hand, providers will beneﬁt from the additional
capabilities and infrastructure size, as well as from reduced management overhead,
in the same way any entity may beneﬁt from exploiting a public cloud, respectively
from moving privately hosted services to a cloud.
Not all issues in this context can be solved right away, however; in particular
the enhanced requirements toward distributed scheduling where individual
customer contracts may be in direct conﬂict (i.e., the base image and the
resource consumption) and need to be aligned for best resource exploitation
will pose serious issues. In order to aid resource usage, vertical scalability and
segmentation of individual resource to host multiple concurrent environments
with little conﬂicts need to improved, because they do not currently offer the
versatility and dynamicity required.
With the growing requirements for resources and the increasing interest
in cloud infrastructures, as well as the implicit risk for isolated providers to
conﬂict contracts during provisioning, mashing up cloud environments
to provide bigger infrastructures is an implicit next development step. This
will also allow providers to extend beyond the local restrictions of their
resources and pure resource providers to sell their infrastructure everywhere.
REFERENCES
1.
Platform Computing. Platform Symphony, http://www.platform.com/workload-
management/SOA-grid-computing.
2.
S. Shankland, T. Krazit, Widespread Google Outages Rattle Users. http://news.
cnet.com/widespread-google-outages-rattle-users/.
546
RESOURCE CLOUD MASHUPS


3.
M. Volpe, Google Crashes the Internet and Frustrates Marketers Everywhere,
http://blog.hubspot.com/blog/tabid/6307/bid/4764/Google-Crashes-the-Internet-
and-Frustrates-Marketers-Everywhere.aspx.
4.
M. Arrington, Google App Engine Goes Down and Stays Down, http://tech
crunch.com/2008/06/17/google-app-engine-goes-down-and-stays-down/
5.
M. Siegler, Google App Engine Stalled Out For About 6 Hours Today, http://
techcrunch.com/2009/07/02/google-app-engine-broken-for-4-hours-and-counting/
6.
Google Groups. Google App Engine Downtime Notify, http://groups.google.com/
group/google-appengine-downtime-notify.
7.
Open Cloud Manifesto, http://www.opencloudmanifesto.org/Open%20 Cloud%
20Manifesto.pdf.
8.
W. Vambenepe, Reality Check on Cloud portability, http://stage.vambenepe.com/
archives/684.
9.
Cloud Computing Expert Working Group, The Future of Cloud Computing
Schubert, http://cordis.europa.eu/fp7/ict/ssai/docs/cloud-report-ﬁnal.pdf.
10.
Google Finance, http://www.google.com/ﬁnance.
11.
W. M. P van der Aalst, M. Dumas, and A. H. M ter Hofstede, Web service
composition languages: Old wine in new bottles? in Proceedings of the 29th
EUROMICRO Conference, Track on Software Process and Product Improvement,
2003, pp. 298305.
12.
MS Azure, http://www.microsoft.com/azure/default.mspx.
13.
Google Chrome OS, http://www.google.com/chrome.
14.
C. Bolchini, C. A. Curino, E. Quintarelli, F. A. Schreiber and L. Tanca, A data-
oriented survey of context models, SIGMOD Record, 36(4):1926, 2007.
15.
R. Miller, Where Amazon’s Data Centers Are Located, http://www.datacenter
knowledge.com/archives/2008/11/18/where-amazons-data-centers-are-located/.
16.
M. Armbrust, A. Fox, R. Grifﬁth, A. Joseph, R. Katz, A. Konwinski, G. Lee, D.
Patterson, A. Rabkin, I. Stoica, and M. Zahari, Above the Clouds: A Berkeley
View of Cloud Computing, Technical Report, University of California at Berkeley,
2009.
17.
Wowza Media Systems, Wowza Pro Unlimited with MPEG-TS for Amazon EC2,
http://www.wowzamedia.com/ec2.php.
18.
S. Perlman, OnLive: Coming to a Screen Near You, http://blog.onlive.com/2010/
03/10/onlive-coming-to-a-screen-near-you/.
19.
J. Y Chainon, The End of Non-aggregated News? http://www.editorsweblog.org/
newsrooms_and_journalism/2007/09/the_end_of_nonaggregated_news.php.
20.
Wikipedia. Aggregator, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aggregator.
21.
M.
Klems,
Cloud
Mashups,
http://markusklems.wordpress.com/2009/01/30/
cloud-mashups/.
22.
A. Irimie, Cloud Mashups—Web 3.0 or Cloud 2.0?, http://www.azurejournal.com/
2008/11/cloud-mashups-web-30-or-cloud-20/.
23.
N. Singh, What Do You Get When You Cross Salesforce.com and Amazon S3?,
http://blog.appirio.com/2008/04/what-do-you-get-when-you-cross.html.
24.
Web Service Interoperability Organization, Web Services Interoperability Orga-
nization (WS-I) and E-Government, http://www.ws-i.org/Docs/Brochures/Web
REFERENCES
547


%20Services%20Interoperability%20Organization%20(WS-I)%20and%20E-
Government.pdf.
25.
A. Kipp, L. Schubert, M. Assel, and T. Fernando, Dynamism and data manage-
ment in distributed, collaborative working environments, in Proceedings of the 8th
International Conference on the Design of Cooperative Systems, 2008. pp. 1622.
26.
Amazon, 2006. Amazon Elastic Cloud Computing (Amazon EC2), http://aws.
amazon.com/ec2/.
27.
DistributedManagementTaskForce,2009.OpenVirtualizationFormatSpeciﬁcation
v1.0, http://www.dmtf.org/standards/published_documents/DSP0243_1.0.0.pdf.
28.
AbiCloud, http://abicloud.org/display/abiCloud/AbiCloud+Overview.
29.
The Diverse and Exploding Digital Universe: An Updated Forecast of Worldwide
Information Growth Through 2011, IDC White Paper, (2008).
30.
G. Aloisio, S. Fiore, Towards exascale distributed data management, International
Journal of High Performance Computing Applications, 23(4):398340, 2009.
31.
D. Borthakur, The Hadoop Distributed ﬁle system: Architecture and Design,
http://hadoop.apache.org/common/docs/current/hdfs-design.html.
32.
S. Ghemawat, H.
Gobioff, and S. Leung, The Google ﬁle system, SIGOPS
Operating Systems Review, 37(5):2943.
33.
R. Chaiken, B. Jenkins, P. Larson, B. Ramsey, D. Shakib, S. Weaver, and J. Zhou,
SCOPE: Easy and efﬁcient parallel processing of massive data sets, in Proceedings
of the International Conference on Very Large Databases, 2009, pp. 12651276.
34.
D. Yuan, Y. Yang, Y. Liu, and J. Chen, A data placement strategy in scientiﬁc
cloud workﬂows, Future Generation Computer Systems, 26(8):12001214, 2010.
35.
Y. Chen, R. Katz, and J. Kubiatowicz, Dynamic replica placement for scalable
content delivery, Revised Papers from the First International Workshop on Peer-To-
Peer Systems, Lecture Notes In Computer Science, 2429:306318, 2002.
36.
R. Berbner, T. Grollius, N. Repp, O. Heckmann, E. Ortner, and R. Steinmetz, An
approach for the management of service-oriented architecture (SoA) based
application systems, in Proceedings of Enterprise Modelling and Information
Systems Architectures, 2005, pp. 208221.
37.
C. Hui and S. Chanson, Improved strategies for dynamic load balancing. IEEE
Concurrency, 7(3):5867, 1999.
38.
Microsoft Live Mesh, http://www.mesh.com.
39.
Horizontal Scalability, http://searchcio.techtarget.com/sDeﬁnition/0,sid182_gci
929011,00.html.
40.
VMWare Converter, http://www.vmware.com/products/converter/.
41.
N. Milanovic and M. Malek, Current solutions for Web service composition, IEEE
Internet Computing 8(6):5159.
548
RESOURCE CLOUD MASHUPS


PART VI
GOVERNANCE AND CASE STUDIES


CHAPTER 22
ORGANIZATIONAL READINESS AND
CHANGE MANAGEMENT IN THE
CLOUD AGE
ROBERT LAM
22.1
INTRODUCTION
Studies for Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD) economies in 2002 demonstrated that there is a strong correlation
between changes in organization and workplace practices and investment in
information technologies [1]. This ﬁnding is also further conﬁrmed in Canadian
government studies, which indicate that the frequency and intensity of
organizational changes is positively correlated with the amount and extent
of information technologies investment. It means that the incidence of
organizational change is much higher in the ﬁrms that invest in information
technologies (IT) than is the case in the ﬁrms that do not invest in IT, or those
that invest less than the competitors in the respective industry [2].
In another study, Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson, and Hitt [3] found that there is
positive correlation between information technology change (investment),
organizational change (e.g., process re-engineering, organizational structure),
cultural change (e.g., employee empowerment), and the value of the ﬁrm as a
measure of the stock market share price. This is mostly due to the productivity
and proﬁtability gain through technology investment and organizational
changes. The research and analysis ﬁrm Gartner has released the Hype Cycle
report for 2009, which evaluates the maturity of 1650 technologies and trends in
79 technologies. The report, which covers new areas this year, deﬁnes cloud
computing as the latest growing trend in the IT industry, stating it as “super-
hyped.” The other new areas include data center power, cooling technologies,
and mobile device technologies [4].
Cloud Computing: Principles and Paradigms,
Edited by Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg and
Andrzej Goscinski
Copyright r 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
551


In order to effectively enable and support enterprise business goals and
strategies, information technology (IT) must adapt and continually change. IT
must adopt emerging technologies to facilitate business to leverage the new
technologies to create new opportunities, or to gain productivity and reduce
cost. Sometimes emerging technology (e.g., cloud computing: IaaS, PaaS, SaaS)
is quite disruptive to the existing business process, including core IT services—
for example, IT service strategy, service design, service transition, service
operation, and continual service improvement—and requires fundamental
re-thinking of how to minimize the negative impact to the business, particularly
the potential impact on morale and productivity of the organization.
22.1.1
The Context
The adaptation of cloud computing has forced many companies to recognize
that clarity of ownership of the data is of paramount importance. The protection
of intellectual property (IP) and other copyright issues is of big concern and
needs to be addressed carefully.
This chapter will help the student to assess the organization readiness to adopt
the new/emerging technology. What is the best way to implement and manage
change? While this chapter attempts to explain why change is important and
why change is complex, it also raises the question of (a) managing emerging
technologies and (b) the framework and approaches to assess the readiness of the
organization to adopt. Managing emerging technologies is always a complex
issue, and managers must balance the desire to create competiveness through
innovation with the need to manage the complex challenges presented by these
emerging technologies. Managers need to feel comfortable dealing with the
paradox of increasing complexity and uncertainty, and they need balance it with
desirable level of commitment and built-in ﬂexibility.
22.1.2
The Take Away
Transition the organization to a desirable level of change management maturity
level by enhancing the following key domain of knowledge and competencies:
Domain 1.
Managing the Environment: Understand the organization (peo-
ple, process, and culture).
Domain 2.
Recognizing and Analyzing the Trends (Business and Technol-
ogy): Observe the key driver for changes.
Domain 3.
Leading for Results: Assess organizational readiness and archi-
tect solution that delivers deﬁnite business values.
22.2
BASIC CONCEPT OF ORGANIZATIONAL READINESS
Change can be challenging; it brings out the fear of having to deal with
uncertainties. This is the FUD syndrome: Fear, Uncertainty, and Doubt.
552
ORGANIZATIONAL READINESS AND CHANGE MANAGEMENT IN THE CLOUD AGE


Employees understand and get used to their roles and responsibility and are
able to leverage their strength. They are familiar with management’s expecta-
tion of them and don’t always see a compelling reason to change. Whenever
there are major changes being introduced to the organization, changes that
require redesign or re-engineering the business process, change is usually
required to the organizational structure and to speciﬁc jobs. Corporate leader-
ship must articulate the reasons that change is critical and must help the
workers to visualize and buy into the new vision. Corporate leadership also
needs to communicate and cultivate the new value and beliefs of the organiza-
tion that align and support the corporate goals and objectives. The human
resources department also needs to communicate the new reward and com-
pensation system that corresponds to the new job description and identify new
training and skills requirements that support the new corporate goal and
objectives.
It is a common, observable human behavior that people tend to become
comfortable in an unchanging and stable environment, and will become uncom-
fortable and excited when any change occurs, regardless the level and intensity of
the change.
A recent study by IBM, “Making Change Work,” suggested that some 60%
of projects fail to meet objectives; signiﬁcant expense is incurred in terms of
wasted money, lost opportunity, and lack of focus. The respondents from their
study identiﬁed several of the key barriers to change. The most signiﬁcant
challenges when implementing change projects are people-oriented; topping the
list are changing mindsets (58%) and corporate culture (49%). No wonder we
keep hearing that the “soft stuff” is the hardest to get right [5].
A survey done by Forrester in June 2009 suggested that large enterprises are
going to gravitate toward private clouds. The three reasons most often ad-
vanced for this are:
1. Protect Existing Investment: By building a private cloud to leverage
existing infrastructure.
2. Manage Security Risk: Placing private cloud computing inside the
company reduces some of the fear (e.g., data integrity and privacy issues)
usually associated with public cloud.
22.2.1
A Case Study: Waiting in Line for a Special Concert Ticket
It is a Saturday morning in the winter, the temperature is 212C outside, and
you have been waiting in line outside the arena since 5:00 AM this morning for
concert tickets to see a performance by Supertramp. You have been planning
for this with your family for the past 10 months since they announced that
Supertramp is coming into town next December. When it is your turn at the
counter to order tickets, the sales clerk announces that the concert is all sold
out. What is your reaction? What should you do now without the tickets? Do
22.2
BASIC CONCEPT OF ORGANIZATIONAL READINESS
553


you need to change the plan? Your reaction would most likely be something
like this:
 Denial. You are in total disbelief, and the ﬁrst thing you do is to reject the
fact that the concert has been sold out.
 Anger. You probably want to blame the weather; you could have come
here 10 minutes earlier.
 Bargaining. You try to convince the clerk to check again for any available
seats.
 Depression. You are very disappointed and do not know what to do next.
 Acceptance. Finally accepting the inevitable fate, you go to plan B if you
have one.
The ﬁve-stage process illustrated above was originally proposed by Dr. Elizabeth
Ku¨ bler-Ross to deal with catastrophic news. There are times in which people
receive news that can seem catastrophic; for example; company merger, right-
sizing, and so on. In her book On Death and Dying, Elizabeth Ku¨ bler-Ross
describes what is known as the “Ku¨ bler-Ross model” or the “Five Stages of
Grief”; this model relates to change management, speciﬁcally the emotions felt
by those affected by change. The ﬁrst stage of major change is often the
announcement; there are situations when an understanding of the ﬁve-stage
process will help you move more quickly to deal with the issue.
22.2.2
What Do People Fear?
Let’s look at this from a different perspective and try to listen to and
understand what people are saying when they ﬁrst encounter change.
“That is not the way we do things here; or it is different in here. . . .”
People are afraid of change because they feel far more comfortable and safe by
not going outside their comfort zone, by not rocking the boat and staying in the
unchanged state.
“It is too risky. . .”
People are also afraid of losing their position, power, beneﬁts, or even their jobs
in some instances. It is natural for people to try to defend and protect their
work and practice.
All these behaviors seem appropriate with respect to cloud computing,
companies have historically rewarded people who avoid risks, especially
corporations and organizations that have cultivated and tolerated the following
philosophy: “No one ever got ﬁred for buying technology from the industry
leader measured by market size, and not necessarily decided on the amount of
innovation produced.”
554
ORGANIZATIONAL READINESS AND CHANGE MANAGEMENT IN THE CLOUD AGE


The more common concerns are related to cloud computing, and some of
them are truly legitimate and require further study, including:
 Security and privacy protection
 Loss of control (i.e., paradigm shift)
 New model of vendor relationship management
 More stringent contract negotiation and service-level agreement (SLA)
 Availability of an executable exit strategy
22.3
DRIVERS FOR CHANGES: A FRAMEWORK TO COMPREHEND
THE COMPETITIVE ENVIRONMENT
The Framework. The ﬁve driving factors for change encapsulated by the
framework are:
 Economic (global and local, external and internal)
 Legal, political, and regulatory compliance
 Environmental (industry structure and trends)
 Technology developments and innovation
 Sociocultural (markets and customers)
The ﬁve driving factors for change is an approach to investigate, analyze,
and forecast the emerging trends of a plausible future, by studying and
understanding the ﬁve categories of drivers for change. The results will help
the business to make better decisions, and it will also help shape the short- and
long-term strategies of that business. It is this process that helps reveal the
important factors for the organization’s desirable future state, and it helps
the organization to comprehend which driving forces will change the compe-
titive landscape in the industry the business is in, identify critical uncertainties,
and recognize what part of the future is predetermined such that it will happen
regardless how the future will play out. This approach also helps seek out those
facts and perceptions that challenge one’s underlying assumptions, and thus it
helps the company make a better decision.
Every organization’s decisions are inﬂuenced by particular key factors, some
of them are within the organization’s control, such as (a) internal ﬁnancial
weakness and strength and (b) technology development and innovation,
and therefore the organization has more control. The others, such as legal
compliance issues, competitor capabilities, and strategies, are all external
factors over which the organization has little or no control. There are also
many other less obvious external factors that will impact the organization;
identifying and assessing these fundamental factors and formulating a course of
action proactively is paramount to any business success.
A driving force or factor is a conceptual tool; it guides us to think deeply
about the underlying issues that impact our well-being and success. In a
22.3
A FRAMEWORK TO COMPREHEND THE COMPETITIVE ENVIRONMENT
555


business setting, it helps us to visualize and familiarize ourselves with future
possibilities (opportunities and threats).
22.3.1
Economic (Global and Local, External and Internal)
Economic factors are usually dealing with the state of economy, both local and
global in scale. To be successful, companies have to live with the paradox of
having new market and business opportunities globally, and yet no one can be
isolated from the 2008 global ﬁnancial crisis, because we are all interdependent.
Managers are often asked to do more with less, and this phenomenon is
especially true during economic downturn. Managers and groups are expected
to deal with the unpleasant facts of shrinking market share, declining proﬁt
margins, unsatisfactory earnings, new and increasing competition, and decreas-
ing competitiveness.
Following are sample questions that could help to provoke further discussion:
 What is the current economic situation?
 Whatwilltheeconomylooks likin1year, 2years,3years, 5years, andsoon?
 What are some of the factors that will inﬂuence the future economic
outlook?
 Is capital easy to access?
 How does this technology transcend the existing business model?
 Buy vs. build? Which is the right way?
 What is the total cost of ownership (TCO)?
22.3.2
Legal, Political, and Regulatory Compliance
This section deals with issues of transparency, compliance, and conformity. The
objective is to be a good corporate citizen and industry leader and to avoid the
potential cost of legal threats from external factors.
The following are sample questions that could help to provoke further
discussion:
 What are the regulatory compliance requirements?
 What is the implication of noncompliance?
 What are the global geopolitical issues?
22.3.3
Environmental (Industry Structure and Trends)
Environmental factors usually deal with the quality of the natural environment,
human health, and safety. The following are sample questions that could help
to provoke further discussion:
 What is the implication of global warming concern?
 Is a green data center over-hyped?
556
ORGANIZATIONAL READINESS AND CHANGE MANAGEMENT IN THE CLOUD AGE


 How can IT initiatives help and support organizational initiatives to
reduce carbon footprint?
 Can organizations and corporations leverage information technology,
including cloud computing to pursue sustainable development?
22.3.4
Technology Developments and Innovation
Scientiﬁc discoveries are seen to be key drivers of economic growth; leading
economists have identiﬁed technological innovations as the single most
important contributing factor in sustained economic growth. There are many
fronts of new and emerging technologies that could potentially transform our
world. For example, new research and development in important ﬁelds such
as bioscience, nanotechnology, and information technology could potentially
change our lives.
The following are sample questions that could help to provoke further
discussion:
 When will the IT industry standards be ﬁnalized? By who? Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)?
 Who is involved in the standardization process?
 Who is the leader in cloud computing technology?
 What about virtualization of applicationoperating system (platform)
pair (i.e., write once, run anywhere)?
 How does this emerging technology (cloud computing) open up new areas
for innovation?
 How can an application be built once so it can conﬁgure dynamically
in real time to operate most effectively, based on the situational constraint
(e.g., out in the cloud somewhere, you might have bandwidth constraint to
transfer needed data)?
 What is the guarantee from X Service Providers (XSP) that the existing
applications will still be compatible with the future infrastructure (IaaS)?
Will the data still be executed correctly?
22.3.5
Sociocultural (Markets and Customers)
Societal factors usually deal with the intimate understanding of the human side
of changes and with the quality of life in general. A case in point: The companies
that make up the U.S. defense industry have seen more than 50% of their market
disappear. When the Berlin Wall tumbled, the U.S. government began chopping
major portions out of the defense budget. Few would disagree that the
postCold War United States could safely shrink its defense industry. Survival
of the industry, and therefore of the companies, demands that companies
combine with former competitors and transform into new species [6].
22.3
A FRAMEWORK TO COMPREHEND THE COMPETITIVE ENVIRONMENT
557


The following are sample questions that could help to provoke further
discussion:
 What are the shifting societal expectations and trends?
 What are the shifting demographic trends?
 How does this technology change the user experience?
 Is the customer the king?
 Buy vs. build? Which is the right way?
 How does cloud computing change the world?
 Is cloud computing over-hyped?
22.3.6
Creating a Winning Environment
At the cultural level of an organization, change too often requires a lot of
planning and resource. This usually stems from one common theme: Senior
management and employees have different perspectives and interpretations of
what change means, what change is necessary, and even if changes are
necessary at all. In order to overcome this, executives must articulate a new
vision and must communicate aggressively and extensively to make sure that
every employee understands [7]:
1. The new direction of the ﬁrm (where we want to go today)
2. The urgency of the change needed
3. What the risks are to
a. Maintain status quote
b. Making the change
4. What the new role of the employee will be
5. What the potential rewards are
 Build a business savvy IT organization.
 Are software and hardware infrastructure an unnecessary burden?
 What kind of things does IT do that matter most to business?
 Would the IT professional be better off focusing on highly valued
product issues?
 Cultivate an IT savvy business organization.
 Do users require new skill and expertise?
One of the important value propositions of cloud computing should be to
explain to the decision maker and the users the beneﬁts of:
 Buy and not build
 No need for a large amount of up-front capital investment
558
ORGANIZATIONAL READINESS AND CHANGE MANAGEMENT IN THE CLOUD AGE


 Opportunity to relieve your smartest people from costly data-center
operational activities; and switch to focus on value-added activities
 Keep integration (technologies) simple
22.4
COMMON CHANGE MANAGEMENT MODELS
There are many different change management approaches and models, and we
will discuss two of the more common models and one proposed working model
(CROPS)here;theLewin’sChangeManagementModel,theDemingCycle(Plan,
Do, Study, Act) and the proposed CROPS Change Management Framework.
22.4.1
Lewin’s Change Management Model
Kurt Lewin, a psychologist by training, created this change model in the 1950s.
Lewin observed that there are three stages of change, which are: Unfreeze,
Transition, and Refreeze. It is recognized that people tend to become compla-
cent or comfortable in this “freeze” or “unchanging/stable” environment, and
they wish to remain in this “safe/comfort” zone. Any disturbance/disruption to
this unchanging state will cause pain and become uncomfortable.
In order to encourage change, it’s necessary to unfreeze the environment by
motivating people to accept the change. The motivational value has to be
greater than the pain in order to entice people to accept the change. Maintain-
ing a high level of motivation is important in all three phases of the change
management life cycle, even during the transition period. As Lewin put it,
“Motivation for change must be generated before change can occur. One must
be helped to reexamine many cherished assumptions about oneself and one’s
relations to others.” This is the unfreezing stage from which change begins.
The transition phase is when the change (plan) is executed and actual change
is being implemented. Since these “activities” take time to be completed, the
process and organizational structure may also need to change, speciﬁc jobs may
also change. The most resistance to change may be experienced during this
transition period. This is when leadership is critical for the change process to
succeed, and motivational factors are paramount to project success.
The last phase is Refreeze; this is the stage when the organization once again
becomes unchanging/frozen until the next time a change is initiated [8].
22.4.2
Deming Cycle (Plan, Do, Study, Act)
The Deming cycle is also known as the PDCA cycle; it is a continuous
improvement (CI) model comprised of four sequential subprocesses; Plan,
UNFREEZE
TRANSITION
REFREEZE
22.4
COMMON CHANGE MANAGEMENT MODELS
559


Do, Check, and Act. This framework of process and system improvement was
originally conceived by Walter Shewhart in the 1930s and was later adopted by
Edward Deming. The PDCA cycle is usually implemented as an evergreen
process, which means that the end of one complete pass (cycle) ﬂows into the
beginning of the next pass and thus supports the concept of continuous quality
improvement.
Edward Deming proposed in the 1950s that business processes and systems
should be monitored, measured, and analyzed continuously to identify varia-
tions and substandard products and services, so that corrective actions can be
taken to improve on the quality of the products or services delivered to the
customers.
 PLAN:
Recognize an opportunity and plan a change.
 DO:
Execute the plan in a small scale to prove the concept.
 CHECK: Evaluate the performance of the change and report the results
to sponsor.
 ACT:
Decide on accepting the change and standardizing it as part of
the process.
Incorporate what has been learned from the previous steps to plan new
improvements, and begin a new cycle.
Deming’s PDCA cycle is illustrated in Fig 22.1: Deming’s PDCA cycle.
Study the result; redesign
systems to reflect learning –
change standards and
regulations where
necessary; communicate it
broadly; retrain …
Understand the gap between
residents’ expectations and what
is being delivered; set priorities
for closing gaps; develop
an action plan to
close the gaps
PLAN
DO
CHECK
ACT
Implement changes;
collect data to determine
if gaps are closing …
Observe the effects of the
change and test – analyze data
and pinpoint problems …
BETTER
ENVIRONMENT
FOR CITIES
FIGURE 22.1. Deming’s PDCA cycle.
Source: http://www.gdrc.org/uem/iso14001/pdca-cycle.gif.
560
ORGANIZATIONAL READINESS AND CHANGE MANAGEMENT IN THE CLOUD AGE


22.4.3
A Proposed Working Model: CROPS
Change Management Framework
For many organizations, change management focuses on the project manage-
ment aspects of change. There are a good number of vendors offering products
that are intended to help organizations manage projects and project changes,
including the Project Portfolio Management Systems (PPMS). PPMS groups
projects so they can be managed as a portfolio, much as an investor would
manage his/her stock investment portfolio to reduce risks.
In the IT world, a project portfolio management system gives manage-
ment timely critical information about projects so they can make better
decisions; re-deploy resources due to changing priorities, and keep close tabs
on progress.
However, as the modern economy moves from product and manufacturing
centric to a more information and knowledge base focus, the change manage-
ment process needs to reﬂect that people are truly the most valuable asset of the
organization. Usually, an organization experiences strong resistance to change.
Employees are afraid of the uncertainty, they feel comfortable with the stable
state and do not want to change, and are afraid to lose their power if things
change. To them, there is no compelling reason to change, unless the company
can articulate a compelling reason and communicate it effectively to convince
them and inﬂuentially engage them to change.
The best approaches to address resistance are through increased and sustained
communications and education. The champion of change, usually the leader—
for example, the Chief Information Ofﬁcer (CIO) of the organization—should
communicate the Why aggressively and provide a Vision of Where he wants to go
today. There are many writings and models on organization development (i.e.,
how). A summary of this working model follows: Culture, Rewards, Organiza-
tion and Structures, Process, Skills and Competencies (CROPS) framework.
Culture. Corporate culture is a reﬂection of organizational (management and
employees) values and belief. Edgar Schein, one of the most prominent theorists
of organizational culture, gave the following very general deﬁnition [9, 10]:
The culture of a group can now be deﬁned as: A pattern of shared basic
assumptions that the group learned as it solved its problems of external adapta-
tion and internal integration, that has worked well enough to be considered valid
and, therefore, to be taught to new members as the correct way to perceive, think,
and feel in relation to those problems.
Elements of organizational culture may include:
 Stated values and belief
 Expectations for member behavior
 Customs and rituals
 Stories and myths about the history of the organization
22.4
COMMON CHANGE MANAGEMENT MODELS
561


 Norms—the feelings evoked by the way members interact with each other,
with outsiders, and with their environment
 Metaphors and symbols—found embodied in other cultural elements
Rewards and Management System. This management system focuses on
how employees are trained to ensure that they have the right skills and tools to
do the job right. It identiﬁes how to measure employee job performance and
how the company compensates them based on their performance. Reward is
the most important ingredient that shapes employees’ value and beliefs.
Organization and Structures. How the organization is structured is largely
inﬂuenced by what the jobs are and how the jobs are performed. The design of
the business processes govern what the jobs are, and when and where they get
done. Business processes need to align with organizational vision, mission, and
strategies in order to create customer and shareholder values. Therefore, all the
components of the CROPS framework are interrelated.
Process. Thomas Davenport [11] deﬁned a business process or business
method as a collection of related, structured activities or tasks that produce a
speciﬁc service or product (serve a particular goal) for a particular customer or
customers.
Hammer and Champy’s [12] deﬁnition can be considered as a subset of
Davenport’s. They deﬁne a process as “a collection of activities that takes one
or more kinds of input and creates an output that is of value to the customer.”
Processes
Skills and
Competencies
Culture
Rewards and
Management
Systems
Organization
and Structures
FIGURE 22.2. CROPS framework.
562
ORGANIZATIONAL READINESS AND CHANGE MANAGEMENT IN THE CLOUD AGE


A process is where the work gets done, and value creation occurs through
transforming input into output.
Skills and Competencies. Specialized skills that become part of the organi-
zational core competency enable innovation and create a competitive edge.
Organizations that invest in research and development which emphasize
investing in people’s training and well-being will shape a winning strategy.
The CROPS model is illustrated in Figure 22.2.
Although each component tackles a different requirement for change, a
holistic view of the issue at hand is the best way to pursue a better under-
standing of the change implications to the organization as a whole. It is almost
certain that if one of the speciﬁc components is changed, many of the other
components will need to be changed as a result.
22.5
CHANGE MANAGEMENT MATURITY MODEL (CMMM)
A Change Management Maturity Model (CMMM) helps organizations to (a)
analyze, understand, and visualize the strength and weakness of the ﬁrm’s
change management process and (b) identify opportunities for improvement
and building competitiveness. The model should be simple enough to use and
ﬂexible to adapt to different situations. The working model in Table 22.1 is
based on CMM (Capability Maturity Model), originally developed by Amer-
ican Software Engineering Institute (SEI) in cooperation with Mitre Corpora-
tion. CMM is a model of process maturity for software development, but it has
since been adapted to different domains. The CMM model describes a ﬁve-level
process maturity continuum, depicted in Table 22.1.
How does CMMM help organizations to adopt new technology, including
cloud computing, successfully? The business value of CMMM can be expressed
in terms of improvements in business efﬁciency and effectiveness. All organiza-
tional investments are business investments, including IT investments. The
resulting beneﬁts should be measured in terms of business returns. Therefore,
CMMM value can be articulated as the ratio of business performance to CMMM
investment; for example
ROITðCMMMÞ 5 Estimated total business performance improvement
Total CMMM investmentðTCOÞ
whereas
 ROIT: Observed business value or total return on investment from IT
initiative (CMMM)
 Business performance improvement
 Reduce error rate
22.5
CHANGE MANAGEMENT MATURITY MODEL (CMMM)
563
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>


TABLE 22.1. A Working Model: Change Management Maturity Model (CMMM)
Description
CROPS
Practice
Speciﬁc to CMMM
Characteristics of Organization
Path to Next Higher Level
Key Results and Beneﬁts (or, the
Lack There of)
Level 5
Optimized
P 1 R
AT this level of process maturity,
the focus is on improving process
performance.
Operational excellence/organiza-
tional competency
Change management as part of the
core competency.
Culturally, employee accepts that
change is constant and in a rapid
rate.
Achieve strategic/operational ex-
cellence.
Extensive training exists at all level
of organization.
Better business and IT strategic
alignment.
Enabling innovation.
Create competitiveness.
Level 4
Managed
CROPS
Adopted speciﬁc change manage-
ment methodology and process.
Centralized and standardized
change management control and
tracking to manage risks and sus-
tain quality of products and
services.
Organization and management
can ﬁnd ways to change, evolve,
and adapt the process to particular
project needs; with minimal or no
impact to quality of products or
services being delivered as mea-
sured against SLA.
Continuous process improvement.
Effective business and IT strategic
alignment.
Achieve higher level of quality.
Higher degree of customer/user
satisfaction.
Reduce costs.
Higher proﬁtability.
Increase revenue and market
share.
Level 3
Deﬁned
CROPS
Standardizing change manage-
ment processes and practices.
Processes at this level are deﬁned
and documented.
Some process improvement pro-
jects initiate overtime.
Better appreciation of value of IT.
Better business and IT integration.
Level 2
Repeatable
COPS
Accept the importance of change
management process.
No standardization/centralization
of change management process
and practice.
Poor change authorization and
tracking scheme.
It is characteristic of processes at
this level that some processes are
repeatable.
Standardize and centralize change
management process.
Project failure rate is still too high.
Changes are still very disruptive to
business operation.
Level 1
Ad hoc
(disruptive)
None
No change management processes.
No speciﬁc or informal change
management process and practice
exist anywhere.
Change can be made with no con-
trol at all; there is no approval
mechanism, no track record and
no single party accountable for the
failure.
Chaotic
Reactive
Disruptive
Uncontrolled
Unstable
Constantly operate in a
ﬁreﬁghting mode.
Adopt formal change management
practice.
No awareness of the beneﬁts of
adopting change management and
best practice.
Project failures are too often and
too costly.
No understanding of risk man-
agement, and do not have the
capacity to manage and minimize
disruption to IT and business due
to change and/or the failure of the
uncontrolled changes.
564


 Increase customer/user satisfaction
 Customer retention
 Employee retention
 Increase market share and revenue
 Increase sales from existing customer
 Improve productivity
 And others
 CMMM investment
 Initial capital investment
 Total cost of ownership (TCO) over the life of the investment (solution)
22.5.1
A Case Study: AML Services Inc.
AML (A Medical Laboratory Services Inc.) is one of the medical laboratory
service providers for a city with a population of one million, and AML is a
technology-driven company with 150 employees serving the city and surround-
ing municipalities. Although the barrier to entry is high—the ﬁeld requires a lot
of startup investment for equipment and technologies (e.g., laboratory testing,
X ray, MRI, and information technologies), as well as highly skilled staff—
there is some competition in this segment of the health care industry.
In 2009, AML was experiencing continual growth in demand of service from
their patients, partly due to the H1N1 ﬂu phenomenon and partly due to the
aging of the population. The company was hampered by outdated IT infra-
structure, however; there was urgent need to upgrade the unsupported version
of the mail server and to enhance communication between the mobile work
force (courier service) and the dispatcher, and it is recommended that courier
vehicles be equipped with laptop and Wi-Fi capability. A Web-based reserva-
tion application system enabling patients to book their appointment on-line has
been approved by the company.
Tom Cusack, the CIO of AML, decides to hire a consulting ﬁrm to help him
architect the right solution for AML. Potential discussion questions could be as
follows:
 Should AML consider cloud computing part of the solution?
 Is AML ready for cloud computing?
 What does “done” look like?
 How can the organization overcome these challenges of change?
22.6
ORGANIZATIONAL READINESS SELF-ASSESSMENT:
(WHO, WHEN, WHERE, AND HOW)
An organizational assessment is a process intending to seek a better under-
standing of the as-is (current) state of the organization. It also deﬁnes the
22.6
ORGANIZATIONAL READINESS SELF-ASSESSMENT
565


roadmap (strategies and tactics) required to ﬁll the gap and to get the organiza-
tion moving toward where it wants to go (future state) from its current state.
The process implies that the organization needs to complete the strategy
analysis process ﬁrst and to formulate the future goals and objectives that
support the future direction of the business organization.
The organizational assessment can be conducted by either an internal or
external professional, depending on whether the expertise is available. Before
the actual assessment begins, the champion of change (perhaps the CEO of
the organization) is advised to articulate the vision of the ﬁrm, where the
organization wants to go tomorrow, and how it intends to get there. This is a
critical opportunity for the leader of the ﬁrm to inﬂuence the crowd and rally
the troops to support for the changes the ﬁrm desires.
During an effective organization readiness assessment, it is desirable to
achieve the following:
 Articulate and reinforce the reason for change.
 Determine the as-is state.
 Identify the gap (between future and current state).
 Anticipate and assess barriers to change.
 Establish action plan to remove barriers.
Involve the right people to enhance buy-in:
 It is critical to involve all the right people (stakeholders) across the
organization, and not just management and decision-makers, as partici-
pants in any organization assessment. Stakeholders can be interpreted as
anyone who may potentially be affected by the changes. A cross-sectional
representation from the organization is paramount to success.
Asking the “right questions” is also essential. The assessment should provide
insight into your challenges and help determine some of these key questions:
 How big is the gap?
 Does your organization have the capacity to execute and implement
changes?
 How will your employees respond to the changes?
 Are all your employees in your organization ready to adopt changes that
help realize the vision?
 What are the critical barriers to success?
 Are you business partners ready to support the changes?
Are you ready? Table 22.2 shows a working assessment template.
566
ORGANIZATIONAL READINESS AND CHANGE MANAGEMENT IN THE CLOUD AGE


22.7
DISCUSSION
Gartner Research has just released the Hype Cycle report for 2009, which
evaluates the maturity of over 1500 technologies and 501 technology trends.
TABLE 22.2. Working Assessment Template
Nontechnical
Agree
Don’t
Know
Disagree
Does your organization have a good common un-
derstanding of why business objectives have been met
or missed in the past?
Does your organization have a good common un-
derstanding of why projects have succeeded or failed
in the past?
Does your organization have a change champion?
Does your organization perceive change as unneces-
sary disruption to business?
Does your organization view changes as the man-
agement fad of the day?
Does your organization adopt an industry standard
change management best practice and methodology
approach?
Does your organization adopt and adapt learning
organization philosophy and practice?
How familiar is your organization with service pro-
visioning with an external service provider?
Technical
Does your organization implement any industry
management standards?
 ITIL
 COBIT
 ITSM
 others
Does your organization have a well-established pol-
icy to classify and manage the full lifecycle of all
corporate data?
Can you tell which percentage of your applications is
CPU-intensive, and which percentage of your appli-
cations is data-intensive?
22.7
DISCUSSION
567


The report suggests that the cloud computing is the latest growing trend in the
IT industry. According to Gartner Research, cloud computing is expected to
hit the peak of the “inﬂated expectations” in the next few years. It is expected
that cloud computing data security and integrity issues will be reﬁned over time
as the technology matured. The pay-as-you-go business model will mature with
the technology over time; it will become more transparent and will behave more
like a true utility model, such that you can easily work with a service provider
without worrying about the security of the data. To summarize what we have
learned, one can entertain to leverage the formula developed by management
consultant David Gleicher:
Dissatisfaction 3 Vision of future possibilities 3 Achievable first stepÞ
cResistance to change
This means that any component that is equal to zero or near zero will make the
left-hand side of the equation equal to or approaching zero. In order to make
the change initiative successful, the product of the left-hand side equation must
be a lot greater than that of the right-hand side of the equation (pain or
resistance to change).
22.7.1
Case Study: ENCANA CORP.
EnCana Corp, Canada’s biggest energy company, announced early Sunday
afternoon—on Mother’s Day—its plans to split into two discrete companies,
an oil company and a natural gas company, in an effort to wring out more
shareholder value with crude prices at record highs. This has all the DNA of the
company’s chairman, David O’Brien: In 2001, under O’Brien’s visionary
leadership, tremendous value was created when CP Limited was split up into
ﬁve separate companies and one of them was PanCanadian Petroleum. The
challenge is to quickly establish a corporate culture that would bridge
the somewhat divergent cultures of its two predecessor companies [13, 14].
EnCana is based in Calgary, Alberta, Canada. It is the largest producer of
natural gas in North America, producing 3.8 billion cubic feet per day in 2008.
EnCana also some conventional oil and shale oil operations, but natural gas
production accounts for more than 80% of the total production. According to
CIBC Assessment Management (May 2008 issue), when EnCana announced its
intention to split into two parts, it had a market capitalization of about $65
billion, second only to Research in Motion in companies listed on the Toronto
Stock Exchange.
EnCana, a $65 billion energy producer formed in 2002 in a $27 billion
merger of PanCanadian Petroleum (which focused on oil) and Alberta Energy
Corporation (which focused on gas production), said the move should help
investors better gauge and appreciate the real value of the business of the
respective products and remove a so-called “holding company discount” it
suffers in the stock market.
568
ORGANIZATIONAL READINESS AND CHANGE MANAGEMENT IN THE CLOUD AGE


Over the last few years, EnCana has sold off assets that were deemed non-core
to the business, assets that are located in the North Sea, Mexico, and Ecuador in
order to focus its operations on North America (i.e., United States and Canada).
EnCana is usually viewed as a major natural gas explorer and producer; the
oil sands plays in Alberta were almost treated as after thoughts.
It is expected that the proposed split of EnCana would be similar to the CP
Enterprise split in 2001; the reorganization of EnCana should have the same
impact on the two new companies being created. It should result in (a) better
market valuations because of greater transparency for shareholders and (b)
greater clarity when it comes to allocating capital for expenditures within each
entity.
2008 Highlights (As Published on Their Web Site): Financial (US$)
 Cash ﬂow increased 13% per share to $12.48, or $9.4 billion.
 Operating earnings were up 9% per share to $5.86, or $4.4 billion.
 Net earnings were up 53% per share to $7.91, or $5.9 billion, primarily
due to an after-tax unrealized mark-to-market hedging gain of $1.8 billion
in 2008 compared to an after-tax loss of $811 million in 2007.
 Capital investment, excluding acquisitions and divestitures, was up 17%
to $7.1 billion.
 Generated $2.3 billion of free cash ﬂow (as deﬁned in Note 1 on page 10),
down $112 million from 2007.
 Operating cash ﬂow nearly doubled to $421 million from the company’s
Foster Creek and Christina Lake upstream projects, whereas lower
reﬁning margins and higher purchased product costs resulted in a $241
million loss in operating cash ﬂow for the downstream business. As a
result, EnCana’s integrated oil business venture with ConocoPhillips
generated $180 million of operating cash ﬂow.
In October 2008, EnCana announced that its plan to split into two
companies has been put on hold because of the current global ﬁnancial crisis:
“The unprecedented uncertainty in the debt and credit markets has certainly
become more difﬁcult and this kind of extraordinary time we’ve decided to
wait,” says Alan Boras, a spokesperson for EnCana.
EnCana ofﬁcials insisted that the plan hasn’t been abandoned and that the
reasons for breaking into a pure natural gas producer and an integrated oil ﬁrm
are still valid, despite the setback.
“We remain committed to creating Cenovus; [then name of the integrated oil
company] and we are continuing to work on reorganizing our company’s
structure so we are ready to move forward with the transaction at the
appropriate time,” said CEO Randy Eresman.
“However, there is currently too much uncertainty in the global debt and
equity markets to proceed . . . at this time. We cannot predict when the
appropriate ﬁnancial and market conditions will return, but EnCana will be
22.7
DISCUSSION
569


prepared to advance the proposed transaction when it determines that the
market conditions are appropriate,” Eresman said.
The discussion questions could be as follows:
1. How would cloud computing be a part of the solution to facilitate the
splitting of the company into two effectively and efﬁciently and with
minimal disruption to the business?
2. What would you advise EnCana executives to do at the 2008 worldwide
ﬁnancial market meltdown and the subsequent economic recession?
3. What would your advice be from a business and IT strategic alignment
perspective if you were brought in to advise EnCana IT executives?
4. What were the risks if EnCana went ahead with the split?
5. What were the risks if EnCana put the split on hold?
6. If EnCana is successful in its maneuver, could its peers and competitors
consider splitting their assets into distinct companies to create greater
shareholder value?
7. What IT migration strategy would you recommend EnCana to adopt in
order to achieve the highest ﬂexibility and adaptability to changes?
8. Would you recommend that EnCana buy or build a duplicate IT
infrastructure for each distinct organization as the most efﬁcient way to
align and support the business organization, both the new and the old?
9. Would you recommend cloud computing or utility computing as the
solution to EnCana’s business problem?
10. How would you assess the organizational readiness for EnCana?
11. Would it make any difference if IT can accommodate all the necessary
changes to facilitate the split up of the ﬁrm into two distinct entities one-
third of the planned required time?
22.8
CONCLUSION
Twenty-ﬁrst century successful business must be able to cope with the paradox
of being an IT-savvy business organization, and it must be able to build a
business-savvy IT organization that enables the business to leverage the new
infrastructure to prosper.
The design of the IT infrastructure needs to be robust, available, and ﬂexible
enough such that it can accommodate all future business requirements,
whatever the business processes are going to look like.
In architecting an IT architecture that is future-proof, it needs to include the
following capabilities and processes, among others:
 Full Life-Cycle Management. Make sure that the solution delivers immedi-
ate results and business beneﬁts and yet takes a longer view, and ensure that
the data will integrate/migrate with future technology platform easily.
570
ORGANIZATIONAL READINESS AND CHANGE MANAGEMENT IN THE CLOUD AGE


 Operation Excellence. Establish and manage the SLA, continuously
monitor and control the quality of services proactively, and report and
communicate the business values to stakeholders and partners regularly.
 Strategic Alignment. Set up and practice an enterprise architecture planning
and design process, eliminate building silos and islands of data, and promote
standardization and portfolio management principles to manage risks. The
objective is to design, integrate, and deploy a resilient IT infrastructure that
enables business to deliver value to customers and shareholders.
22.8.1
Going Forward
Business and IT leaders have an unprecedented opportunity today to imple-
ment change. Information technology can be used as a catalyst for change, for
the right opportunity and relevant solution.
Leadership is crucial to success. Business and IT leaders must ﬁrst deﬁne the
vision for change, understand the long-term strategic direction of the business,
anticipate the fundamental roadblocks and articulate the potential resistance to
successful change, formulate a change in management strategy and plan for
actions to overcome those obstacles to successful change, and complete your
resource planning to ensure that you have the right resources at the right time
to complete the change.
Remember that information technology can be a powerful enabler to
business processes, but IT itself is not the panacea to organizational problems.
As Harvard Business School professor Rosabeth Moss Kanter said before,
develop “a culture that just keep moving all the time.”
Is the organization ready for cloud computing? Time is of the essence:
Change is the only thing being constant, and if there is one thing technology
cannot change, it is time. One approach to help business to be more adaptive to
change is to architect a ﬂexible and scalable (in both expanding and shrinking)
IT infrastructure.
Here are some important pointers that we have discussed earlier:
 Select the right cloud solution that meet the business requirements (e.g.,
SaaS).
 Build strategic partnership with the right service provider(s).
 Plan, negotiate, execute, monitor, and control your contract and SLA
vigorously and proactively.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank various people for their comments on this chapter,
especially Michael Mohammed and Carol Guay.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
571


REFERENCES
1.
M. Murphy, Organizational change and ﬁrm performance, in OECD Science,
Technology and Industry Working Papers, OECD Publishing, Paris, 2002, p. 14.
2.
J. R Baldwin and J. Johnson, Business strategies in innovative and non-innovative
ﬁrms in Canada, in Analytical Studies Research Paper Series 11F0019MIEI1995073,
Analytical Studies Branch, Canada, 1995.
3.
Bresnahan, Brynjolfsson, and Hitt, INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY, WORK-
PLACE ORGANIZATION, AND THE DEMAND FOR SKILLED LABOR:
FIRM-LEVEL EVIDENCE, 2000.
4.
M. Raskino, Gartner’s 2009. Hype Cycle Special Report Evaluates Maturity of
1,650 Technologies, http://www.gartner.com/it/page.jsp?id 5 1124212, retrieved on
March 6, 2010.
5.
H. H. Jørgensen, Making change work: IBM continuing, The Enterprise of The
Future Conversation, 2008, pp. 1415.
6.
N. R. Augustine, Reshaping an industry. Lockheed Martin’s survival story. in
Harvard Business Review on Change, HBS Press, Boston, 1998.
7.
J. P. Kotter, Leading change: Why transformation efforts fail, Harvard Business
Review on Change. HBS Press, Boston, 1998.
8.
E. H. Schein, Kurt Lewin’s Change Theory in the Field and in the Classroom:
Notes Toward a Model of Managed Learning’, Edgar H. Schein, Professor of
Management Emeritus, MIT Sloan School of Management, http://dspace.mit.edu/
bitstream/handle/1721.1/2576/SWP-3821-32871445.pdf;jsessionid 5 28CF6FB51B
FA9F43A015CE1C5D45C3B2?sequence 5 1, retrieved on 8/9/2009.
9.
A. Kritsonis, Comparison of change theories, International Journal of Scholarly
Academic Intellectual Diversity, 8(1):12, 20042005.
10.
R. H. Rouda and M. E. Kusy, Jr., Organizational culture: Symphony Orchestra
Institute, development of human resources—Part 3, Organization development the
management of change, TAPPI Journal, Technical Association of the Pulp and
Paper Industry, 1995.
11.
T. Davenport, Process Innovation: Reengineering Work Through Information
Technology. Havard Business School Press, 1992.
12.
Hammer and Champy Reengineering the Corporation: Manifesto for Business
Revolution, Michael Hammer and James Champy. 1993.
13.
EnCana follows familiar strategy. http://www.canada.com/calgaryherald/news/
story.html?id 5 e2ce91ee-6c74-4d4d-b3b2-6af0b994c58e, retrieved on 09/12/2008.
14.
EnCana revises schedule for creation of Cenovus Energy due to ﬁnancial markets
uncertainty. Reuters, http://www.reuters.com/article/pressRelease/idUS1078211 1
15-Oct-2008 1 PRN20081015, retrieved on 09/12/2008.
572
ORGANIZATIONAL READINESS AND CHANGE MANAGEMENT IN THE CLOUD AGE


CHAPTER 23
DATA SECURITY IN THE CLOUD
SUSAN MORROW
23.1
AN INTRODUCTION TO THE IDEA OF DATA SECURITY
Taking information and making it secure, so that only yourself or certain
others can see it, is obviously not a new concept. However, it is one that we
have struggled with in both the real world and the digital world. In the real
world, even information under lock and key, is subject to theft and is certainly
open to accidental or malicious misuse. In the digital world, this analogy of
lock-and-key protection of information has persisted, most often in the form of
container-based encryption. But even our digital attempt at protecting infor-
mation has proved less than robust, because of the limitations inherent in
protecting a container rather than in the content of that container. This
limitation has become more evident as we move into the era of cloud
computing: Information in a cloud environment has much more dynamism
and ﬂuidity than information that is static on a desktop or in a network folder,
so we now need to start to think of a new way to protect information.
Before we embark on how to move our data protection methodologies into
the era of The cloud, perhaps we should stop, think, and consider the true
applicability of information security and its value and scope. Perhaps we
should be viewing the application of data security as less of a walled and
impassable fortress and more of a sliding series of options that are more
appropriately termed “risk mitigation.”
The reason that I broach this subject so early on is that I want the reader to
start to view data security as a lexicon of choices, as opposed to an on/off
technology. In a typical organization, the need for data security has a very wide
scope, varying from information that is set as public domain, through to
information that needs some protection (perhaps access control), through
Cloud Computing: Principles and Paradigms,
Edited by Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg and
Andrzej Goscinski
Copyright r 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
573


to data that are highly sensitive, which, if leaked, could cause catastrophic
damage, but nevertheless need to be accessed and used by selected users.
One other aspect of data security that I want to draw into this debate is the
human variable within the equation. Computer technology is the most modern
form of the toolkit that we have developed since human prehistory to help us
improve our lifestyle. From a human need perspective, arguably, computing is
no better or worse than a simple stone tool, and similarly, it must be built to ﬁt
the hand of its user. Technology built without considering the human impact is
bound to fail. This is particularly true for security technology, which is
renowned for failing at the point of human error.
If we can start off our view of data security as more of a risk mitigation
exercise and build systems that will work with humans (i.e., human-centric),
then perhaps the software we design for securing data in the cloud will be
successful.
23.2
THE CURRENT STATE OF DATA SECURITY IN THE CLOUD
At the time of writing, cloud computing is at a tipping point: It has many
arguing for its use because of the improved interoperability and cost savings it
offers. On the other side of the argument are those who are saying that cloud
computing cannot be used in any type of pervasive manner until we resolve the
security issues inherent when we allow a third party to control our information.
These security issues began life by focusing on the securing of access to the
datacenters that cloud-based information resides in. However, it is quickly
becoming apparent in the industry that this does not cover the vast majority of
instances of data that are outside of the conﬁnes of the data center, bringing us
full circle to the problems of having a container-based view of securing data.
This is not to say that data-center security is obsolete. Security, after all, must
be viewed as a series of concentric circles emanating from a resource and
touching the various places that the data go to and reside. However, the very
nature of cloud computing dictates that data are ﬂuid objects, accessible from a
multitude of nodes and geographic locations and, as such, must have a data
security methodology that takes this into account while ensuring that this
ﬂuidity is not compromised. This apparent dichotomy—data security with
open movement of data—is not as juxtaposed as it ﬁrst seems. Going back to
my previous statement that security is better described as “risk mitigation,” we
can then begin to look at securing data as a continuum of choice in terms of
levels of accessibility and content restrictions: This continuum allows us to
choose to apply the right level of protection, ensuring that the ﬂexibility
bestowed by cloud computing onto the whole area of data communication is
retained.
As I write, the IT industry is beginning to wake up to the idea of content-
centric or information-centric protection, being an inherent part of a data
object. This new view of data security has not developed out of cloud computing,
574
DATA SECURITY IN THE CLOUD


but instead is a development out of the idea of the “de-perimerization” of
the enterprise. This idea was put forward by a group of Chief Information
Ofﬁcers (CIOs) who formed an organization called the Jericho Forum [1]. The
Jericho Forum was founded in 2004 because of the increasing need for data
exchange between companies and external parties—for example: employees
using remote computers; partner companies; customers; and so on. The old way
of securing information behind an organization’s perimeter wall prevented this
type of data exchange in a secure manner. However, the ideas forwarded by the
Jericho Forum are also applicable to cloud computing. The idea of creating,
essentially, de-centralized perimeters, where the perimeters are created by the
data object itself, allows the security to move with the data, as opposed to
retaining the data within a secured and static wall. This simple but revolutionary
change in mindset of how to secure data is the ground stone of securing
information within a cloud and will be the basis of this discussion on secur-
ing data in the cloud.
23.3
HOMO SAPIENS AND DIGITAL INFORMATION
Cloud computing offers individuals and organizations a much more ﬂuid and
open way of communicating information. This is a very positive move forward
in communication technology, because it provides a more accurate mimic of the
natural way that information is communicated between individuals and groups
of human beings. Human discourse, including the written word, is, by nature,
an open transaction: I have this snippet of information and I will tell you, verbally
or in written form, what that information is. If the information is sensitive, it may
be whispered, or, if written on paper, passed only to those allowed to read it.
The result is that human-to-human information communication will result in a
very ﬂuid discourse. Cloud computing is a platform for creating the digital
equivalent of this ﬂuid, human-to-human information ﬂow, which is something
that internal computing networks have never quite achieved. In this respect,
cloud computing should be seen as a revolutionary move forward in the use of
technology to enhance human communications.
Although outside of the remit of this chapter, it is worthwhile for any person
looking into developing systems for digital communications to attempt to
understand the underlying social evolutionary and anthropological reasons
behind the way that human beings communicate This can give some insight
into digital versions of communication models, because most ﬁt with the
natural way that humans communicate information. Security system design, in
particular, can beneﬁt from this underlying knowledge, because this type of
system is built both to thwart deceptive attempts to intercept communication
and to enhance and enable safe and trusted communications: Bear in mind that
both deception and trust are intrinsic evolutionary traits, which human beings
have developed to help them to successfully communicate.
23.3
HOMO SAPIENS AND DIGITAL INFORMATION
575


23.4
CLOUD COMPUTING AND DATA SECURITY RISK
The cloud computing model opens up old and new data security risks. By its very
deﬁnition, Cloud computing is a development that is meant to allow more open
accessibility and easier and improved data sharing. Data are uploaded into a
cloud and stored in a data center, for access by users from that data center; or in
a more fully cloud-based model, the data themselves are created in the cloud and
stored and accessed from the cloud (again via a data center). The most obvious
risk in this scenario is that associated with the storage of that data. A user
uploading or creating cloud-based data include those data that are stored and
maintained by a third-party cloud provider such as Google, Amazon, Microsoft,
and so on. This action has several risks associated with it: Firstly, it is necessary
to protect the data during upload into the data center to ensure that the data do
not get hijacked on the way into the database. Secondly, it is necessary to the
stores the data in the data center to ensure that they are encrypted at all times.
Thirdly, and perhaps less obvious, the access to those data need to be controlled;
this control should also be applied to the hosting company, including the
administrators of the data center. In addition, an area often forgotten in the
application of security to a data resource is the protection of that resource during
its use—that is, during a collaboration step as part of a document workﬂow
process. Other issues that complicate the area of hosted data include ensuring
that the various data security acts and rules are adhered to; this becomes
particularly complicated when you consider the cross border implications of
cloud computing and the hosting of data in a country other than that originating
the data.
Data security risks are compounded by the open nature of cloud computing.
Access control becomes a much more fundamental issue in cloud-based systems
because of the accessibility of the data therein. If you use a system that provides
improved accessibility and opens up the platform to multi-node access, then you
need to take into account the risks associated with this improvement. One way
this can be done is by adding an element of control, in the form of access control,
to afford a degree of risk mitigation. Information-centric access control (as
opposed to access control lists) can help to balance improved accessibility with
risk, by associating access rules with different data objects within an open and
accessible platform, without losing the inherent usability of that platform.
A further area of risk associated not only with cloud computing, but also
with traditional network computing, is the use of content after access. The risk
is potentially higher in a cloud network, for the simple reason that the
information is outside of your corporate walls; for example, a user printing
off a sensitive document within an ofﬁce of a company is more likely to think
twice about doing so if her colleagues can see her actions than if she prints out
that document in the privacy of her own home or within the anonymity of an
Internet cafe.
Recent research by Gartner, on the top 10 “disruptive technologies,”
outlined these as being key transformation technologies for the industry. The
576
DATA SECURITY IN THE CLOUD


technologies included Cloud and Web ecosystems as well as virtualization and
social software [2]. Gartner predict that by 2010, Mashups, used to create
composite applications to share and combine internal and external data
sources, will be used as the dominant mode of creation for enterprise
composite, applications [3]. In addition to this, corporate blogs are being
heavily touted as a means of disseminating and collaborating on information:
Technorati research for the 2008 State of the Blogosphere report puts corporate
blogging at 12% of the total blogs [4],1 and a Universal McCann study shows
that consumers think more positively about companies that have blogs [5];
Statistics suggest that this media will become more heavily used within a
corporate context.
A recent survey by Citrix which polled UK IT directors and managers
showed that two-thirds of UK companies were computing in the cloud. Of
those polled, one-third said they thought there were security risks and 22% said
they had concerns over the control of their data in the cloud [6]. However,
coupled with these improvements in computing capabilities come new technical
challenges and hurdles, in particular in the area of security because of the highly
complex manner in which security applications need to operate and inter-
operate. The Internet and mobile devices have effectively opened up new points
at which data can leak; and as new methods of communicating emerge, they
will open up even more potential for information loss.
The development of Web 2.0 technologies has created a new and more
dynamic method of communicating information; blogs, social networking sites,
Web conferencing, wikis, podcasts and ultimately cloud computing itself offer
new and novel methods of getting information from a to b; unfortunately, this
can also often be via x, y, and z.
Since cloud computing has come to the fore, there has been a general
consensus that data within this domain are more at risk. While on the one hand
these new technologies are being met with a degree of enthusiasm, there is also
an equal degree of fear in terms of securing data and risk management [7].
Compliance with data security directives and acts still needs to be met, no
matter what platform for communication is being used. The lack of security
and privacy within a cloud computing environment is hotly debated over
whether this problem is perceived or real. However, reports by IT industry
analysts suggest that this is a real problem and must be overcome to allow full
utilization of cloud computing. A recent report by IDC which surveyed 244
respondents identiﬁed security as the main challenge for cloud computing, with
74.6% of the vote stating this as a stumbling block to the uptake of the
technology [8]. Reports by Gartner and Gigacom, speciﬁcally on cloud security,
also conﬁrms this [9, 10].
With new technologies come new exploits; and cloud computing, being by
deﬁnition a more open way of performing information technology operations,
will bring security challenges that will leave Internet-based data vulnerable. As
1Universal McCann (March 2008) have put the ﬁgures for live blogs at 184 million, worldwide.
23.4
CLOUD COMPUTING AND DATA SECURITY RISK
577


previously mentioned, mashups have been identiﬁed as being a security
concern. Data-centric mashups—that is, those that are used to perform
business processes around data creation and dissemination—by their very
nature, can be used to hijack data, leaking sensitive information and/or
affecting integrity of that data. An InfoWorld article summed up this fear:
“. . . megabytes of valuable customer or ﬁnancial data could be compromised in
just a few seconds if a rogue data-centric mashup is created” [11].
Cloud computing, more than any other form of digital communication
technology, has created a need to ensure that protection is applied at the
inception of the information, in a content centric manner, ensuring that a
security policy becomes an integral part of that data throughout its life cycle.
Encryption is a vital component of the protection policy, but further
controls over the access of that data and on the use of the data must be met.
In the case of mashups the controlling of access to data resources, can help
alleviate the security concerns by ensuring that mashup access is authenticated.
Linking security policies, as applied to the use of content, to the access control
method offer a way of continuing protection of data, post access and
throughout the life cycle; this type of data security philosophy must be
incorporated into the use of cloud computing to alleviate security risks.
We can thus conclude that the risk proﬁle of an organization, or individual,
using the cloud to store, manage, distribute, and share its information has
several layers. Each layer can be seen as a separate, but tied, level of risk that
can be viewed independently, but these risks should be approached as a whole,
to make sure that areas constituting a “weakest link” do not end up built into
the system.
23.5
CLOUD COMPUTING AND IDENTITY
Digital identity holds the key to ﬂexible data security within a cloud environ-
ment. This is a bold statement, but nonetheless appears to be the method of
choice by a number of industry leaders. However, as well as being a perceived
panacea for the ills of data security, it is also one of the most difﬁcult
technological methods to get right. Identity, of all the components of informa-
tion technology, is perhaps the most closest to the heart of the individual. After
all, our identity is our most personal possession and a digital identity represents
who we are and how we interact with others on-line. The current state of the art
in digital identity, in particular with reference to cloud identities, is a work in
progress, which by the time you are reading this should hopefully be entering
more maturity. However, going back to my opening statement, digital identity
can be used to form the basis of data security, not only in the cloud but also at
the local network level too. To expand on this somewhat, we need to look at the
link between access, identity, and risk. These three variables can become
inherently connected when applied to the security of data, because access and
risk are directly proportional: As access increases, so then risk to the security of
578
DATA SECURITY IN THE CLOUD


the data increases. Access controlled by identifying the actor attempting the
access is the most logical manner of performing this operation. Ultimately,
digital identity holds the key to securing data, if that digital identity can be
programmatically linked to security policies controlling the post-access usage
of data.
The developments seen in the area of a cloud-based digital identity layer
have been focused on creating a “user-centric” identity mechanism. User-
centric identity, as opposed to enterprise-centric identity, is a laudable design
goal for something that is ultimately owned by the user. However, the Internet
tenet of “I am who I say I am” [12] cannot support the security requirements of
a data protection methodology based on digital identity, therefore digital
identity, in the context of a security system backbone, must be a veriﬁed
identity by some trusted third party: It is worth noting that even if your identity
is veriﬁed by a trusted host, it can still be under an individual’s management
and control.
With this proposed use of identity, on the type of scale and openness as
expected in a cloud computing context, we must also consider the privacy
implications of that individual’s identity. A digital identity can carry with it
many identiﬁers about an individual that make identity theft a problem, but
identity should also be kept private for the simple reason of respect. However,
privacy is a very personal choice and, as such, the ability to remain private
within a cloud, should be, at the very least, an option.
23.5.1
Identity, Reputation, and Trust
One of the other less considered areas of digital identity is the link between the
identity and the reputation of the individual identity owner. Reputation is a
real-world commodity that is a basic requirement of human-to-human relation-
ships: Our basic societal communication structure is built upon the idea of
reputation and trust. Reputation and its counter value, trust, is easily
transferable to a digital realm: eBay, for example, having partly built a
successful business model on the strength of a ratings system, builds up the
reputation of its buyers and sellers through successful (or unsuccessful)
transactions. These types of reputation systems can be extremely useful when
used with a digital identity. They can be used to associate varying levels of trust
with that identity, which in turn can be used to deﬁne the level (granular
variations) of security policy applied to data resources that the individual
wishes to access.
23.5.2
Identity for Identity’s Sake
An aspect of identity that again is part of our real world and needs to be
mimicked in the digital world is that of “multiple identities,” because in the
cloud you may ﬁnd that you need a different “identity” or set of identiﬁers to
access resources or perform different tasks.
23.5
CLOUD COMPUTING AND IDENTITY
579


If we are to go down the path of using digital identity as the backbone of a
cloud-based data security system, then we must make sure that the identity
layer of cloud computing is able to handle the very ﬂexible requirements of data
security. These include the need for free ﬂow of information, dynamic policies,
data-centric security, and privacy. User-centric identity systems, based on
dynamic claims (individual identifying artifacts), do seem to have the pre-
requisites for this, and the next part of this chapter will look more closely at the
currently available cloud-based identities including those based on claims.
23.5.3
Cloud Identity: User-Centric and Open-Identity Systems
As the use of the Internet and cloud computing increases, the risks associated
with identifying yourself, via this medium, have also increased. Identity fraud
and theft are a real threat to the uptake and acceptance of cloud computing;
and as already stated, a robust digital identity can be the backbone of data
security in the cloud.
Internet identities such as information cards were originally designed to
overcome the problem of “password fatigue,” which is an increasing problem
for users needing to remember multiple log-on credentials for Web site access.
Similarly, OpenID was developed for the purpose of an easier logon into
multiple Web sites, negating the need to remember username/logon creden-
tials. Information cards differ from OpenID in a fundamental manner in that
information cards have an architecture built on the principle of “claims,”
claims being pieces of information that can be used to identify the card holder.
At this juncture it is worth pointing out that, although OpenID can use claims,
the architecture behind OpenID makes this use of claims less ﬂexible—and,
more importantly, less dynamic in nature—than those offered by information
cards.
One of the most powerful aspects of these Internet identities is the push
toward a common framework of operation. This type of framework can make
managing such identities simpler and provide more extensible cross-platform
and cross-application support, improving scalability and ultimately security.
The IT industry is making great strides in this area by coming together in a
cooperative way to work toward such a common framework. The work toward
this has come about as a result of the large number of prior identity manage-
ment systems built for purpose, but not for interoperability.
23.5.4
The Philosophy of User-Centric Identity
Digital identities are a still evolving mechanism for identifying an individual,
particularly within a cloud environment; and, as such, the philosophy behind
the idea is also still being formed. However, one area that is being recognized as
a basic component of an identity is that of identity ownership being placed upon
the individual (user-centric). Placing ownership with an individual then sets in
place a protocol around the use of the identity. The industry is slanting heavily
580
DATA SECURITY IN THE CLOUD


toward allowing users to consent and control how their identity (and the
individual identiﬁers making up the identity, the claims) is used. This reversal of
ownership away from centrally managed identity platforms (enterprise-centric)
has many advantages. This includes the potential to improve the privacy aspects
of a digital identity, by giving an individual the ability to apply permission
policies based on their identity and to control which aspects of that identity are
divulged. To this end, the term “user-centric” has come to mean that an identity
may be controllable by the end user, to the extent that the user can then decide
what information is given to the party relying on the identity.
23.5.5
User-Centric but Manageable
One area that often gets confused by the use of the term “user-centric” is the
management of users0 identities. Although the term “user-centric” implies that
the identity is under the control and management of the end user (or that the
identity “ﬂows” from the user to the relying application), this is true only
within the context of the use of the identity. For example, in the case of many
user-centric identities, the user can entirely create and manage them within
their own desktop or cloud environment. However, within the context of data
security, a personally managed identity may not carry enough assurance or
weight of nonrepudiation to be used sensibly. In situations that require a
degree of nonrepudiation and veriﬁcation, where a user is who they say they
are—that is, situations that require a digital identity to provide access control
and security—user-centric identities can still be under user control and thus
user-centric (the user choosing which identity and which identity claims to send
across a transaction path) but must be issued and managed by a trusted host
able to verify the user (for example, the users bank). This may seem like a
security paradox, but it is actually a balanced way of using a digital identity to
assign security policies and control while retaining a high measure of privacy
and user choice.
23.5.6
What Is an Information Card?
Information cards permit a user to present to a Web site or other service
(relying party) one or more claims, in the form of a software token, which may
be used to uniquely identify that user. They can be used in place of user name/
passwords, digital certiﬁcates, and other identiﬁcation systems, when user
identity needs to be established to control access to a Web site or other
resource, or to permit digital signing.
Information cards are part of an identity meta-system consisting of:
1. Identity providers (IdP), who provision and manage information cards,
with speciﬁc claims, to users.
2. Users who own and utilize the cards to gain access to Web sites and other
resources that support information cards.
23.5
CLOUD COMPUTING AND IDENTITY
581


3. An identity selector/service, which is a piece of software on the user’s
desktop or in the cloud that allows a user to select and manage their
cards.
4. Relying parties. These are the applications, services, and so on, that can
use an information card to authenticate a person and to then authorize an
action such as logging onto a Web site, accessing a document, signing
content, and so on.
Each information card is associated with a set of claims which can be used to
identify the user. These claims include identiﬁers such as name, email address,
post code, and so on. Almost any information may be used as a claim, if
supported by the identity provider/relying party; for example, a security
clearance level could be used as a claim, as well as a method of assigning a
security policy. Only the claim types are stored in cards issued by an identity
provider; the claim values are stored by the provider, creating a more secure
and privacy-rich system. One of the strengths of these claims is that they are
dynamic and thus can be changed in real time: If linked to a security policy,
they can provide a method of dynamic security policy application. As part of
the security process inherent in the use of the information card, the cards are
backed by an authentication mechanism that the user must satisfy in order to
use the card. This could be a password, possession of an X509 certiﬁcate,
OpenID account, a Kerberos ticket, an out-of-band method, or possession of
another information card, and so on.
One of the most positive aspects of an information card is the user-centric
nature of the card. An information card IdP can be set up so that the end
users themselves can self-issue a card, based on the required claims that they
themselves input—the claims being validated if needed. Alternatively, the
claims can be programmatically input by the IdP via a Web service or similar,
allowing the end user to simply enter the information card site and download
the card.
23.5.7
Using Information Cards to Protect Data
Information cards are built around a set of open standards devised by a
consortium that includes Microsoft, IBM, Novell, and so on.
The original remit of the cards was to create a type of single sign on system
for the Internet, to help users to move away from the need to remember
multiple passwords. However, the information card system can be used in many
more ways. Because an information card is a type of digital identity, it can be
used in the same way that other digital identities can be used. For example, an
information card can be used to digitally sign data and content and to control
access to data and content. One of the more sophisticated uses of an
information card is the advantage given to the cards by way of the claims
system. Claims are the building blocks of the card and are dynamic in that they
582
DATA SECURITY IN THE CLOUD


can be changed either manually or programmatically, and this change occurs in
real time: As soon as the change is made, it can be reﬂected when the card is
used, for example, by a subsequent change in the access or content usage policy
of the resource requiring the information card. This feature can be used by
applications that rely on the claims within an information card to perform
a task (such as control access to a cloud-based data resource such as a
document). A security policy could be applied to a data resource that will be
enacted when a speciﬁc information card claim is presented to it: If this claim
changes, the policy can subsequently change.
For example, a policy could be applied to a Google Apps document
specifying that access is allowed for user A when they present their information
card with claim “security clearance level 5 3” and that post access, this user
will be able to view this document for 5 days and be allowed to edit it. The same
policy could also reﬂect a different security setting if the claim changes, say to a
security clearance level 5 1; in this instance the user could be disallowed access
or allowed access with very limited usage rights.
23.5.8
Weakness and Strengths of Information Cards
The dynamic nature of information cards is the strength of the system, but the
weakness of information cards lies in the authentication. The current informa-
tion card identity provisioning services on offer include Microsoft Geneva,
Parity, Azigo, Higgins Project, Bandit, and Avoco Secure. Each offers varying
levels of card authentication and are chosen from Username and password,
Kerberos token, x509 digital certiﬁcate, and personal card. Each of these
methods has drawbacks. For example, username and password is less secure
and also not transparent. X509 digital certiﬁcates can be difﬁcult for less
technical users to install and use. However, new developments in information
card authentication are on the industry roadmap, including Live ID, OpenID,
and out-of-band (also referred to as “out-of-wallet”). This latter option offers
much higher levels of authentication and thus security, but does have draw-
backs in terms of transparency. However, a full gamut of authentication
offerings can only improve the security of the information card system. Going
forward, it is hoped that GPS location authentication can also be added to the
list of authentication choices to control access to resources. Based on geo-
graphic location of the person attempting access, this could become a
particularly important feature for cloud-based data, which can potentially be
accessed anywhere in the world but may be constrained by compliance with
industry legal requirements.
23.5.9
Cross-Border Aspects of Information Cards
Cloud computing brings with it certain problems that are speciﬁc to a widely
distributed computing system. These problems stem from the cross-border
nature of cloud computing and the types of compliance issues arising out of
23.5
CLOUD COMPUTING AND IDENTITY
583
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>


such a situation. An identity meta-system based on interoperable standards of
issuance and authentication, such as an information card, is an absolute
requirement for digital identity to be successfully used across borders. Infor-
mation cards can potentially provide such a framework, because they are based
on the idea of an identity metasystem, the goal of which is to connect individual
identity systems resulting in cards issued by a given host being compatible
across the entire system. The Oasis Foundation, which is nonproﬁt organiza-
tion that is striving to establish open standards for IT, has formed a working
committee to “enable the use of information cards to universally manage
personal digital identities [13].”
In addition, the Information Card Foundation, headed up by some of the
largest IT companies in the world, has a mission statement that includes: to
“provide guidance and support for projects advancing information card
infrastructure on the widest possible range of platforms, including freely
available open source implementations”2 [14].
The idea of using information cards as a cross-border, interoperable system
was presented in March 2009 as an idea at the The European e-ID interoper-
ability Conference: Current Perspective and Initiatives from around Europe in
Government and Business [15].
The use of information cards as a method of digitally identifying an
individual within the cloud (as well as on the desktop) will gain ground, as
its usage model extends with increased support for information cards, from
relying parties and as usability through the use of cloud-based selectors
becomes more mainstream.
23.6
THE CLOUD, DIGITAL IDENTITY, AND DATA SECURITY
When we look at protecting data, irrespective of whether that protection is
achieved on a desktop, on a network drive, on a remote laptop, or in a cloud,
we need to remember certain things about data and human beings. Data are
most often information that needs to be used; it may be unﬁnished and require
to be passed through several hands for collaboration for completion, or it could
be a ﬁnished document needing to be sent onto many organizations and then
passed through multiple users to inform. It may also be part of an elaborate
workﬂow, across multiple document management systems, working on plat-
forms that cross the desktop and cloud domain. Ultimately, that information
may end up in storage in a data center on a third-party server within the cloud,
but even then it is likely to be re-used from time to time. This means that the
idea of “static” data is not entirely true and it is much better (certainly in terms
of securing that data) to think of it as highly ﬂuid, but intermittently static.
2Increasingly, government bodies are beginning to see the beneﬁts of user-centric identity systems.
For example, the U.S. government has began an initiative to create accessibility through open trust
frameworks based on OpenID and information cards: http://openid.net/government/.
584
DATA SECURITY IN THE CLOUD


What are the implications of this? If we think of data as being an “entity”
that is not restricted by network barriers and that is opened by multiple users in
a distributed manner, then we should start to envision that a successful
protection model will be based on that protection policy being an intrinsic
part of that entity. If the protection becomes inherent in the data object, in
much the same way that perhaps a font type is inherent in a document
(although in the case of security in a much more persistent manner), then it
is much less important where that data resides. However, how this is achieved
programmatically is a little trickier, particularly in terms of interoperability
across hybrid cloud systems.
One of the other aspects of data security we need to assess before embarking
on creating a security model for data in the cloud is the levels of need; that is,
how secure do you want that data to be? The levels of security of any data
object should be thought of as concentric layers of increasingly pervasive
security, which I have broken down here into their component parts to show
the increasing granularity of this pervasiveness:
Level 1: Transmission of the ﬁle using encryption protocols
Level 2: Access control to the ﬁle itself, but without encryption of the content
Level 3: Access control (including encryption of the content of a data object)
Level 4: Access control (including encryption of the content of a data object)
also including rights management options (for example, no copying
content, no printing content, date restrictions, etc.)
Other options that can be included in securing data could also include
watermarking or red-acting of content, but these would come under level 4
above as additional options.
You can see from the increasing granularity laid out here that security,
especially within highly distributed environments like cloud computing, is not
an on/off scenario. This way of thinking about security is crucial to the
successful creation of cloud security models. Content level application of data
security gives you the opportunity to ensure that all four levels can be met by a
single architecture, instead of multiple models of operation which can cause
interoperability issues and, as previously mentioned, can add additional
elements of human error, leading to loss of security.
The current state of cloud computing provides us with a number of cloud
deployment models, namely, public (cloud infrastructure that is open for public
use, for example, Google App engine is deployed in a public cloud), private
(privately available clouds on a private network used by an individual
company; for example, IBM provides private clouds to customers, particularly
concerned by the security issues surrounding public cloud deployments),
managed (clouds offered by a third-party hosting company who look after
the implementation and operational aspects of cloud computing for an organi-
zation), and hybrid (a mix of both public and private cloud implementations). It
23.6
THE CLOUD, DIGITAL IDENTITY, AND DATA SECURITY
585


is highly likely, especially in the early years of cloud computing, that organiza-
tions will use a mixture of several, if not all, of these different models. With this
in mind, to allow an organization to deal with securing data within any of these
types of systems means that the issues of interoperability, cross-cloud support,
minimisation of human error, and persistence of security are crucial. The ﬂuid
movement of data through and between these clouds is an integral part of the
cloud philosophy, and any data security added into this mix must not adversely
encumber this movement. This requires that you look at that data as a separate
entity with respect to the underlying system that it moves through and resides
within. If you do not view the data as a free-moving object, you will build a data
security model that is not built to suit the data, but instead is built for the
speciﬁc system surrounding that data. In a cloud-type system, the end result is
likely to be only suitable for static data (something that we have already
described as not truly existing) which will not be able to transcend that original
system without potentially having to be re-engineered to do so, or at the very
least having additional features and functions tagged onto the original speci-
ﬁcation. This type of software engineering results in interoperability issues and
an increased chance of bugs occurring, because of feature adjuncts being added
as an after thought, as opposed to being built into the original working
architecture of the software. In addition, what can occur with security software
development, which uses a non-extensible approach to software design, is that
security holes end up being inadvertently built into the software, which may be
very difﬁcult to test for as the software feature bloat increases. With this in
mind, the way forward in creating data security software models for a cloud
computing environment must be done from scratch. We must leave the previous
world of encrypted containers behind us and open up a new paradigm of ﬂuidic
protection mechanisms based on content-centric ideologies. Only through this
approach will we hope to achieve transcendence of security across the varying
types of cloud architectures.
23.7
CONTENT LEVEL SECURITY—PROS AND CONS
Much of the substance of this chapter has described a new way of thinking
about securing data, so that data within a cloud can remain ﬂuid, accessible on
multiple nodes and yet remain protected throughout its life cycle. The basis of
this new security model has been described as “content or information-centric.”
What this means in reality is that the content that makes up any given data
object (for example, a Word document) is protected, as opposed to the ﬁle—
that is, the carrier of that information being protected. This subtle difference in
approach gives us a major advantage in terms of granularity and choice of
protection level, as well as persistence of protection. We will take a Word
document as our example here to outline the main pros and cons of this type of
security approach.
586
DATA SECURITY IN THE CLOUD


Imagine that I have just prepared a merger and acquisition (M&A) draft
document using an on-line document authoring application, such as Google
Apps. I need to share this document with persons within my own company,
across several departments, as well as with an external lawyer and with the
third-party company to be acquired. In addition, I want to make sure that
certain sections are only visible to certain of these parties and that they cannot
change any item or copy the content (I don’t want some of the sensitive clauses
to be placed on an ex-employee’s blog page, or leaked to the press to affect
share prices). I also want to audit the access and use of the document and to
limit the time that these people can read the draft of this document, because I
want to close this acquisition within 2 weeks. Thereafter I need to publish the
ﬁnished M&A document with new access rights and restrictions to reﬂect its
new status. I am also acutely aware that the data center that is holding this
sensitive document is being hosted by a cloud vendor, and I deﬁnitely do not
want the administrator of that data center to see this transaction. How can I
achieve this? I could create a shared on-line document portal that controls
access to the document using a password login and set up user accounts for
those persons I wish to share the document with. The main problem with this
type of container-based security is that it relies on the user not sharing their
password. In addition, once access is gained, the user can use the document
without restriction; for example, copy the document content to their blog page,
email the document to others, or download the document to a local computer
and share it with anyone they wish to, across their network. In addition, the
document is potentially accessible by the cloud vendor themselves. To prevent
any of these unauthorized actions, I will need to control the document content
itself and improve on the access control measures, because password access is
far too insecure. This is where a content-centric approach delivers persistent
and pervasive security. Content-centric security, which is also digital identity
led (i.e., the identity used to access the content), also dictates the security policy
applied to that content and will allow me to control who accesses my M&A
draft, because at the time of protecting the draft I will decide who can access it
and how access is controlled. This brings us back to the section on information
cards. I could protect the draft document by assigning access to persons who
hold a managed information card, which contains certain claims—for example,
speciﬁc email addresses, a security clearance level (set by a speciﬁed identity
provider), or a speciﬁed company number, and so on. Only those persons could
then access the document; and because the claims are managed by an identity
provider (perhaps my own company), the claims can also be dynamically
changed and, as such, if I need to revoke access to the document, I can arrange
for the claims to change in line with this, revoke the information card of that
user, or alternatively change the security applied to the document. Once access
is gained, security policies that control what part of the document can be
seen, by which person and what they can do with the content, will be applied;
because the access is based on an individual identity, individual content
controls can be applied and so some users can be given stronger rights
23.7
CONTENT LEVEL SECURITY—PROS AND CONS
587


restrictions than others. Importantly, even though the document is held on
third-party servers, in the cloud it can’t be accessed by even the system
administrator of that server, because the access is controlled at the content
level and is not dependent on the access to the database holding the data.
You can easily see the advantages that are conferred on data protected at the
content level: greater control, more focused access control, increased granular
protection over content, and assurance within a cloud-hosted system. But what,
if any, disadvantages come with this type of methodology?
Container security is a much simpler way of securing data. Within a cloud
computing environment you have the storage and transfer of data, both of
which can be easily accommodated in terms of security by using encryption
protocols already built for the purpose. It is fairly simple to apply database
encryption, because it is applied natively to the data and decrypted, on-the-ﬂy,
when there is a query on that data. Similarly, transfer of the data between
application and database, or human-to-human transfer, can protect the data as
an encrypted package, decrypted when access is granted. Content-centric
security measures need to be compatible with both database security and
secure transfer of data within a cloud environment. Protecting the content of
our Word document needs to be done in such a manner that it does not impact
the storage of that data. This may be problematic, especially across different
storage types and in use with query engines, which is particularly pertinent with
the use of dynamic data updating, as required by modern data storage
operations. One of the other aspects of cloud computing data storage that
can complicate the area of data security is the use of redundant storage in more
than one location [16]. However, at this juncture it is worth noting that this
same issue causes more problems for a container approach than for a content-
centric approach, in terms of synchronicity between databases. The current
state of research, with respect to the protection of data within a cloud
computing environment, is focused on the protection of data within the data
centers hosting the cloud: The problems therein are compounded by the highly
distributed nature of the cloud and the use of multi-center storage and
replication of data. Content-centric security needs to overcome these same
problems and also needs to retain protection of data within the structure of the
database itself; this, however, is a programmatic problem.
23.8
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
This chapter has spent some time discussing digital identity within a cloud
framework. The reason for this emphasis was to show the possibilities that can
be achieved, in terms of data security, when using digital identity as the
backbone for that security. Digital identity is an area that is, as I write,
undergoing some revolutionary changes in what an identity stands for and how
it can be leveraged. As a means of controlling access to information within a
cloud environment, the idea of using a person’s digital identity to do this, as
588
DATA SECURITY IN THE CLOUD


opposed to using authentication alone, or some sort of access control list setup,
opens up new opportunities, not only from a technological standpoint but also
from the viewpoint that ownership of information and privacy of that
information are often inherently linked to individuals and groups. And, as
such, how they access this information becomes much more natural when that
access is by means of truly and digitally identifying themselves.
The idea of using digital identity as a basis for security policy setting and
enforcement, by means of inherently associating that policy with a data object,
is an area that needs to be researched to offer a much more ﬂuid and all-
encompassing approach to cloud-based data security. In particular, the
research needs to focus on interoperability across the differing cloud systems.
The creation of a seamless security model that can accommodate data while
moving through multiple authors and readers, as well as residing within a data
center, is a necessary tool to allow cloud computing to fully mature, because
this will add the much needed levels of trust currently missing from cloud
computing. Without this trust, the communication of information will become
naturally stiﬂed and may place a hurdle to the uptake of cloud computing that
makes the use of the cloud by users with sensitive information and intellectual
property impossible.
Another linked area to the use of digital identity and data security,
particularly within the open context that is the basis of cloud computing, is
that of privacy: Privacy and security should be viewed as two sides of the same
coin. Privacy is a topic that not only has technological implications in how it
can be achieved, but also has humanistic concerns that would need to be
researched to establish the privacy requirements for digital identity and
information used within a cloud domain. This research would potentially
take the form of an anthropological study, in the ﬁrst instance, to determine the
attitude and expectations toward privacy that users have and to what extent
they need privacy issues addressed by technology. In particular, the association
of privacy with the use of a digital identity on-line should be looked into.
Currently there are methods of creating more private identity transactions
which can hide or obfuscate an identity attribute (a social security number, for
example) such as zero-knowledge technology (sometimes called minimal
disclosure) or similar Privacy Enhancing Technologies (PETs) [17]; however,
these methods are still not used in a pervasive manner, and this may be because
of the need to build more user control into the technologies and to add greater
granularity into such systems.
The current push by large vendors such as Google and Microsoft, to offer
cloud-based authoring tools, only exacerbates the issue of unprotected cloud-
based data. Research into integrated forms of encryption and rights manage-
ment technologies by these types of authoring tools will give the users of such
tools a mechanism to protect this intellectual property; however, any data
protection technology in this area must ensure that the information protected
does not lose its agility in terms of movement within the cloud sphere:
Conﬁning the protected data to use within the original authoring application
23.8
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
589


alone may cause the data to lose the beneﬁts of originating in the cloud. It may
also be that these data may still require access outside of the cloud domain—
that is, on a user’s laptop—using traditional authoring tools. This type of cross-
application interoperability is likely to be a particularly problematic area of
research for applications controlling the use of content, because it will require
that the applied protection mechanisms (including potentially support of digital
identity methods for access control) are effective in applications that have
different approaches to how that content is displayed and used. For example,
the control over the use of author applications and menu items, offered to
content users using protected data, may be difﬁcult when cross-application
support is required.
Another area that warrants research is auditing of the access to and use of
information in the cloud. In particular, because of the cross-border nature of
cloud computing, there is likely to be a greater need for location-aware security
restrictions to be used. The area of jurisdiction is one that is problematic in
relation to cloud computing. Often a company will not know the location of the
data center that their data are stored within. And because different countries
have different laws around the access of data, particularly with respect to
governmental access (the USA PATRIOT Act [18], for example), this can be an
area of data security that is difﬁcult to tackle. Back doors are never a good idea
when creating data security systems, but some type of restricted document
access could potentially be built into the system, allowing certain authorities to
gain access under certain conditions. However, one area that does need further
work is that of locking data access to a geographic location. How that
geographic location is assessed is the salient area for research, because currently
GPS systems are little used and come with inherent technical difﬁculties such as
the ability to receive GPS coordinates when inside a building3.
23.9
CONCLUSION
Cloud computing is not just about designing a new type of computing. The
nature of such a globalized communication system necessitates that we look at
that system from many standpoints: humanistic, legal, business led, philoso-
phical, and so on. With the advent of cloud computing, we have an opportunity
to create a more truly robust and usable security system which, arguably, has
eluded us in the traditional world of computing—perhaps because in this legacy
system, security was never built from the ground up, but instead often as an
afterthought: an adjunct to preexisting operating systems and applications.
To create data security that does not affect the free-ﬂowing ethos of cloud-
based data, we need to think differently about what security is and how it
should work. We need to step outside of the container and make sure that
3This GPS problem is starting to ﬁnd a resolution with enhancement of the reception of GPS
systems being heavily researched.
590
DATA SECURITY IN THE CLOUD


security is inherent, as much a part of the data object as the content within that
object itself.
Digital identity, based in the cloud or federated via the cloud with network-
based identity mechanisms, can be used to give us a starting point to control
access to data and also to determine the post-access security policies for that
information.
For cloud computing to be ubiquitous and trusted, we need to make data
security systems that are not hindered by the application the data originates
from, the mode of transport for that data, the place the data is accessed from,
or the device it is used upon. The determining factors for successful cloud data
security are seamlessness and interoperability built around a core of digital-
identity-led security polices.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This chapter is based, in part, on the author’s research work for the European
Commission Seventh Framework Programme, “Parsifal,” as well as on work
carried out in designing security solutions for both traditional and cloud
computing. I would like to thank Drs. Stephen Hitchen and Paul Battersby as
well as Judith Lancet for their comments on this chapter.
FURTHER READING
Open Cloud Manifesto: www.opencloudmanifesto.org.
Laws of Identity: http://www.identityblog.com/?p=354.
Identity in the Age of Cloud Computing: The Next-Generation Internet’s Impact
on Business, Governance and Social Interaction http://www.aspeninstitute.org/
publications/identity-age-cloud-computing-next-generation-internets-impact-
business-governance-socia.
Privacy in the Clouds: A White Paper on Privacy and Digital Identity, http://www.
privacybydesign.ca/pbdbook/PrivacybyDesignBook-ch15.pdf.
HumanCommunication,WhatHappens?http://www.lucs.lu.se/LUCS/043/LUCS.043.pdf.
REFERENCES
1. J. Forum, The Jericho Forum Commandments, http://www.opengroup.org/jericho,
May 2007.
2. P. Kacsuk, Editorial, Journal of Grid Computing, 10723, 2004.
3. C.
Claunch, Top
10 Disruptive and Strategic Technologies
for
Financial
Services, Gartner Research, http://www.wsta.org/content/download/10004/129714/
ﬁle/GartnerKeynote.pdf September 2008.
REFERENCES
591


4. Y. Genovese, Session Speech by Gartner Analyst, in Gartner Symposium/ITxpo,
October 16, 2008.
5. Technorati, State of the Blogosphere report 2008, http://www.technorati.com/
blogging/state-of-the-blogosphere/, June 2008.
6. T. Smith, Wave 3, Universal McCann, http://www.universalmccann.com/Assets/
UM%20Wave%203%20ﬁnal_20080808141650.pdf, March 2008
7. D. Gootzit, G. Phifer, R. Valdes, N. Drakos, A. Bradley, K. Harris, D. Sholler, M.
Pezzini, Y. Natis, B. Gassman, D. Mitchell Smith, D. Ceraley, R. Schulte, S.
Prentice, S. Gall, W. Clark, and A. Lapkin, Hype Cycle for Web and User
Interaction Technologies, 2008: Gartner Research, July 7, 2008, Gartner Inc.
8. D. W. Cearley, T. Austin, |IBM Moves Towards a “Cloud Computing” Infra-
structure,
Gartner
Research,
http://www.gartner.com/resources/153600/153615/
ibm_moves_toward_a_cloud_com_153615.pdf, November 20, 2007.
9. F. Gens, IT Cloud Services User Survey, pt.2: Top Beneﬁts & Challenges, IDC
Research, http://blogs.idc.com/ie/?p=210, October 2, 2008.
10. J. Heiser and M. Nicolett, Assessing the Security Risks of Cloud Computing,
Gartner Research, June 3, 2008, Gartner, Inc.
11. Gigacom Brieﬁng, Cloud Computing, June 2008.
12. C. Hannon, The Video Republic, opendemocracy.net, http://www.opendemocracy.
net/blog/yes/celia-hannon/2008/10/06/the-video-republic, October 6, 2008.
13. Oasis Foundation, OASIS Members Form New Committee to Advance Interoper-
ability Standard for Information Cards, http://www.oasis-open.org/news/imi-press-
release.pdf, September 2008.
14. Information Card Foundation, http://informationcard.net/about.
15. The European e-ID interoperability Conference Current Perspective and Initiatives
from around Europe in Government and Business, http://www.eema.org/down-
loads/2009/e-ID_interoperability/e-ID_interop_prog_2009_web.pdf, March 2009.
16. C. Wang, Q. Wang, K. Ren and W. Lou, Ensuring Data Storage Security in Cloud
Computing, Department of ECE, Illinois Institute of Technology, February 2009.
17. E. Bertino, F. PAci, R. Ferrini, Privacy-preserving Digital Identity Management for
Cloud Computing, Bulletin of the IEEE Computer Society Technical Committee on
Data Engineering, 2009.
18. 107th United States Congress, Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing
Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism (USA PATRIOT
Act),
http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=107_cong_
public_laws&docid 5 f:publ056.107.pdf,Actof2001.
592
DATA SECURITY IN THE CLOUD


CHAPTER 24
LEGAL ISSUES IN CLOUD
COMPUTING
JANINE ANTHONY BOWEN
24.1
INTRODUCTION
“Even before the blades in the data center went down, I knew we had a
problem. That little warning voice in the back of my head had become an
ambulance siren screaming right into my ears. We had all our customers’
applications and data in there, everything from the trivial to the mission
critical. I mumbled one of those prayers that only God and IT types hear,
hoping our decisions on redundancy were the right ones. We had a disaster
recovery plan, but it had never really been battle-tested. Now we were in
trouble; and the viability of not just our enterprise, but also that of many of our
customers, hung in the balance. I can take the hits associated with my own
business, but when someone else’s business could sink. . . it’s different.
I looked over at Mike and Nihkil, our resident miracle workers. The color
had drained from both of their faces. ‘I’ve given you all she’s got, Captain,’
Nikhil said in his best Scotty from Star Trek voice. Looking over at Mike and
sinking even lower into my seat, I knew it was going to be a long and painful
day. . . .”
24.1.1
Objective of Chapter
The worst-case scenario hinted at in the vignette above rarely happens. But in a
world without cloud computing, in most instances the company whose systems
are about to “go down” generally has some measure of control of its fate—
either because the IT resources are internal to the company, or the company
has reasonably tight reins on the provider, either contractually, through
Cloud Computing: Principles and Paradigms,
Edited by Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg and
Andrzej Goscinski
Copyright r 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
593


service-level agreements (SLAs) or otherwise. In the world of cloud computing,
however, the control points are different. In the cloud computing environment,
businesses have essentially outsourced the development, hosting, or running of
applications and data to a third party, that part is not entirely new. What is new
are the combination of: (a) cloud-based service models, (b) relegation of system
control to third parties, (c) use of virtualization, (d) the potential for multi-
vendor integration, and (e) the increasingly borderless nature of Internet
globalization. Technologically it sounds complicated, and it is. But from a
business perspective, cloud computing simply capitalizes on the need of
a business to manage costs, stick to its core competencies, and outsource the
rest. The business case is easy to grasp, but the technology raises some
interesting legal issues that are relevant for both the cloud provider and the
cloud customer. This chapter, written primarily from the United States law
perspective, is intended to be a survey of those issues.
24.1.2
Deﬁnition of Cloud Computing
This chapter assumes that the reader is familiar with the manner in which cloud
computing [1] is deﬁned as set forth by the National Institute of Standards and
Technology [2], a federal agency of the United States Government.
In brief, cloud computing is a model for enabling convenient, on-demand
network access to a shared pool of conﬁgurable computing resources (e.g.,
networks, servers, storage, applications, and services) that can be rapidly
provisioned and released. This cloud model is composed of ﬁve essential
characteristics, three service models, and four deployment models.
24.1.3
Overview of Legal Issues
The legal issues that arise in cloud computing are wide ranging. Signiﬁcant
issues regarding privacy of data and data security exist, speciﬁcally as they
relate to protecting personally identiﬁable information of individuals, but also
as they relate to protection of sensitive and potentially conﬁdential business
information either directly accessible through or gleaned from the cloud
systems (e.g., identiﬁcation of a company’s customer by evaluating trafﬁc
across the network). Additionally, there are multiple contracting models under
which cloud services may be offered to customers (e.g., licensing, service
agreements, on-line agreements, etc.). The appropriate model depends on the
nature of the services as well as the potential sensitivity of the systems being
implemented or data being released into the cloud. In this regard, the risk
proﬁle (i.e., which party bears the risk of harm in certain foreseeable and other
not-so-foreseeable situations) of the agreement and the cloud provider’s limits
on its liability also require a careful look when reviewing contracting models.
Additionally, complex jurisdictional issues may arise due to the potential for
data to reside in disparate or multiple geographies. This geographical diversity
is inherent in cloud service offerings. This means that both virtualization of and
594
LEGAL ISSUES IN CLOUD COMPUTING


physical locations of servers storing and processing data may potentially
impact what country’s law might govern in the event of a data breach or
intrusion into cloud systems. Jurisdictional matters also determine the coun-
try’s law that is applicable to data and information that may be moved
geographically among data centers around the world at any given point in time.
Finally, commercial and business considerations require some attention.
What happens to customer information, applications, and data when a cloud
provider is acquired? What are the implications for that same set of informa-
tion, applications, and data when a cloud provider is ﬁles bankruptcy or ceases
to do business? All of these issues will be explored.
24.1.4
Distinguishing Cloud Computing from Outsourcing
and Provision of Application Services
Cloud computing is different from traditional outsourcing and the application
service provider (ASP) model in the following ways:
 In general, outsourcers tend to take an entire business or IT process of a
customer organization and completely run the business for the beneﬁt of
the customer. Though the outsourcer may provide services similar to those
by multiple customers, each outsourcing arrangement is highly negotiated,
and the contract is typically lengthy and complex. Depending on the
nature of the outsourcing, the software belongs to the customer, and
software sublicense rights were transferred to the outsourcer as part of the
arrangement. The customer’s systems are run on the customer’s equip-
ment, though it is usually at an offsite location managed by the out-
sourcer. Pricing is typically negotiated for each outsourced relationship.
The outsourcer’s ability to scale to meet customer demand is a slow, and
also negotiated, process. The location of the data and processing is
known, predetermined, and agreed to contractually.
 In the ASP model, the service provided is a software service. The software
application may have been used previously in-house by the customer, or it
may be a new value-added offering. The ASP offering is a precursor to
what is now called “software as a service.” The transaction is negotiated,
though typically it is not as complex and highly negotiated as a traditional
outsourcing arrangement. The provider owns the software and hardware,
and the software is accessed over the Internet. The software tends to reside
in one physical location or a group of known locations with redundant
and disaster recovery backups, if any, being housed with third-party
providers. Pricing models vary by service, but tend to be negotiated. The
more sophisticated ASPs have realized that the provision of software over
the Internet is not the same as licensing of software, and the contracting
vehicles for ASP relationships have slowly morphed from typical licensing
models into services arrangements. There is no inherent ability to scale
the use or availability of ASP services on demand, nor is it required.
24.1
INTRODUCTION
595


Less emphasis is placed on location of data and processing than in
outsourcing, though this information was a generally ascertainable.
 Cloud computing covers multiple service models (i.e, software, infrastruc-
ture, and platform as a service). As of this writing, access to cloud
computing services are (at least in the public cloud computing frame-
work), for the most part, one-size-ﬁts-all ‘click here to accept’ agreements,
not negotiated arrangements. Similarly, pricing tended to be unit-based
(hence its comparison to utility computing). In the cloud environment,
performance economies are important for the proﬁtability of the cloud
provider. Therefore a cloud provider may have multiple data centers
geographically dispersed to take advantage of geographic cost differen-
tials. Additionally, the ability of cloud providers to quickly scale up and
down to meet customer requirements dictate that secondary and tertiary
data centers be available either directly from the cloud provider or
through its subcontracted arrangements. The location of data and
processing at any given instant in time tends to be less well known to
the customer in a cloud environment.
24.2
DATA PRIVACY AND SECURITY ISSUES
24.2.1
U.S. Data Breach Notiﬁcation Requirements
Generally speaking, data breach is a loss of unencrypted electronically stored
personal information. This information is usually some combination of name
and ﬁnancial information (e.g., credit card number, Social Security Number). A
breach can occur in many ways—for example, by having a server compromised,
loss of a thumb drive, or theft of a laptop or cell phone. Avoidance of a data
breach is important to both cloud providers and users of cloud services because
of the signiﬁcant harm, both to the user and to the provider, when a breach
occurs. From the user’s viewpoint, if personal information is compromised,
there is a risk of identity theft and of credit or debit card fraud. From the
provider’s viewpoint, ﬁnancial harm, potential for lawsuits, Federal Trade
Commission (FTC) investigations, loss of customers, and damage to reputation
are all likely results of when a data breach occurs. Data breaches can be
expensive. Financial losses from lawsuits, customer claims, protecting reputa-
tion, FTC settlements, and other costs for the most serious U.S. data breaches
have exceeded US $1 billion.
Almost all 50 states in the United States now require notiﬁcation of affected
persons (i.e., residents of the individual state), upon the occurrence of a data
breach. As of this writing, the European Union was considering data breach
legislation. Given the breadth of various laws across most of the United States,
a breach generally results in a company notiﬁcation of persons across the
country when their information has been compromised. Because of these laws,
business customers have attempted to materially expand the contractual
596
LEGAL ISSUES IN CLOUD COMPUTING


obligations of their providers and shift the risk of harm to the provider, the
holder of the personal information. Over time, as more mission-critical
information migrates into the cloud, cloud providers may have to assume
more risk for treatment of personal information in a manner consistent with the
obligations of non-cloud providers. For purposes of data breach law, data in
the cloud are treated no differently than any other electronically stored
information. Cloud providers that have had their systems compromised will
be required to notify affected persons and will have to coordinate with the
cloud users who provided the data in order to do so.
24.2.2
U.S. Federal Law Compliance
GrammLeachBliley Act: Financial Privacy Rule. The Gramm Leach
Bliley Act (GLB) [3] requires, among other things, that ﬁnancial institutions
implement procedures to ensure the conﬁdentiality of personal information and
to protect against unauthorized access to the information. Various United
States government agencies are charged with enforcing GLB, and those agencies
have implemented and currently enforce standards [4]. As part of the require-
ment to prevent unauthorized access to information, ﬁnancial institutions must
take steps to protect information provided to a service provider. A service
provider under GLB may be any number of individuals or companies that
provide services to the ﬁnancial institution and would include a cloud provider
handling the personal information of a ﬁnancial institution’s customers.
The implications to the cloud provider that is providing services to ﬁnancial
institutions are that the cloud provider will, to some degree, have to (1) comply
with the relevant portions of GLB by demonstrating how it prevents un-
authorized access to information, (2) contractually agree to prevent unauthor-
ized access, or (3) both of the above.
The Role of the FTC: Safeguards Rule and Red Flags Rule. At the
United States federal level, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) working
under the auspices of the FTC Act has been given authority to protect
consumers and their personal information. The Safeguards Rule [5] mandated
by GLB and enforced by the FTC requires that all businesses signiﬁcantly
involved in the provision of ﬁnancial services and products have a written
security plan to protect customer information. The plan must include the
following elements [6]:
 Designation of one or more employees to coordinate its information
security program;
 Identiﬁcation and assessment of the risks to customer information in each
relevant area of the company’s operation, and evaluation of the effective-
ness of the current safeguards for controlling these risks;
 Designing and implementing a safeguards program, and regularly mon-
itoring and testing it;
24.2
DATA PRIVACY AND SECURITY ISSUES
597


 Selection of service providers that can maintain appropriate safeguards;
and
 Evaluation and adjustment of the program in light of relevant circum-
stances, including (a) changes in the ﬁrm’s business or operations or
(b) the results of security testing and monitoring.
In 2007, as part of the Fair and Accurate Credit Transaction Act of 2003
(FACT) [7], the FTC promulgated the Red Flag Rules1 (these rules were
scheduled to go into effect in November 2009, but have been delayed several
times). These rules are intended to curb identity theft by having ﬁnancial
institutions identify potential “red ﬂags” for activities conducted through the
organization’s systems that could lead to identity theft. The rules apply to
ﬁnancial institutions or those that hold credit accounts. Holders of credit
accounts include credit issuers, utilities, health-care institutions, auto dealers,
and telecommunications companies. The organizations covered by these rules
must have a written identity theft program [8] to detect speciﬁc activities that
could indicate identity theft.
The Red Flag Rules apply to cloud providers to the same degree as they
apply to other companies in both the off-line and on-line spaces. The cloud
provider must have a written plan and should have monitoring systems to
detect unauthorized access and intrusion in the ordinary course of business.
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act & HITECH Act. The
Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act
(HITECH ACT) [9] requires notiﬁcation of a breach of unencrypted health
records (similar to that under state data breach notiﬁcation requirements
previously discussed) for all covered entitites that are required to comply with
the Health insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA) [10].
USA PATRIOT Act. Shortly after September 11, 2001, the United States
Congress passed the “Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing
Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act” (USA
PATRIOT Act) of 2001[11]. The USA PATRIOT Act has signiﬁcant implica-
tions for the cloud provider seeking to maintain the privacy of data it holds.
For example, the Act allows the installation of devices to record all routing,
addressing, and signaling information kept by a computer. This is the rough
equivalent of a computer tap. The Act also extends the U.S. government’s
ability to gain access to personal ﬁnancial information and student information
stored in electronic systems without any suspicion of wrongdoing of the person
whose information it seeks. The only requirement is governmental certiﬁcation
that the information obtained would be relevant to an ongoing criminal
investigation [12]. A cloud provider may ﬁnd itself in the awkward position
1Red Flags Rules, 16 CFR 1681.
598
LEGAL ISSUES IN CLOUD COMPUTING


of being required to provide information on a cloud user or a cloud user’s
customers to the U.S. government without providing notice to the cloud user.
Neither the cloud user nor its customer likely has much recourse in such an
instance.
24.2.3
International Data Privacy Compliance
European Union Data Privacy Directive. In 1995, the European Union
(EU) passed the “European Union Directive on the Protection of Individuals
with Regard to the Processing of Personal Data and the Movement of Such
Data Privacy Directive” (Directive) [13]. The Directive mandated that countries
that are part of the EU pass a data protection law covering both government
and private entities that process business and consumer data. The Directive
covers written, oral, electronic, and Internet-based data that reside in the EU. A
key feature of the Directive is its extraterritorial effect. That is, the Directive
requires that any geography to which EU personal data is sent must have an
adequate level of data protection as measured by EU standards. What does a
cloud provider need to understand about the directive?
Article 17 of the Directive requires that a data controller (i.e., the person or
organization who determines the purposes and means of processing of the
personal data2) “implement appropriate technical and organizational controls
to protect personal data against accidental or unlawful destruction or acci-
dental loss, alteration, unauthorized disclosure or access. . . .”3 Article 17 also
mandates that there be a written contract between a data controller and a data
processor (i.e., anyone who processes data for the controller) that requires,
among other things, that the data processor act only on instructions from the
data controller. Since a cloud provider will likely be a data processor, Article 17
is particularly important. The language of the cloud provider’s contract is also
particularly important if the cloud provider resides in the EU.
Many cloud providers are outside of the EU, but wish to conduct business
within the EU. The Directive is clear: Data cannot leave the EU unless it goes
to a country that ensures an “adequate level of protection4.” Four methods
currently exist to ensure adequate protection. The ﬁrst, be one of the countries
that have laws that EU deems to be adequate protection. At the time of this
writing, those countries were Argentina, Canada, Guernsey, Isle of Man, and
Switzerland. For the rest of the world adequate protection can be achieved
through (1) compliance with safe harbor provisions, (2) use of model contrac-
tual clauses prepared by the EU (for which strict conformance to the form
language is required), or (3) use of binding corporate rules.
If a cloud provider wishes to conduct business in the EU, place data in its
possession in the EU, or otherwise access the personal information of those in
2Directive, ch. I, art 2(d).
3Directive, ch. II, art 17.
4Id. At ch. IV, art. 25(1).
24.2
DATA PRIVACY AND SECURITY ISSUES
599


the EU, there are compliance obligations under the Directive that must be
studied and followed. The cloud user must ask questions regarding geographic
placement of data, compliance methods, and so on, and get satisfactory
answers prior to placing its personal data (whether through software, platform,
or infrastructure as a service) into a cloud that might include data center
operations in an EU member country.
A Sampling of Other Jurisdictions: Canada and Australia. Many coun-
tries have data protection or data privacy regimes in place, but the coverage
and effect of such regimes is varied. For example, Argentina’s regime is similar
to the EU approach. Brazil, like many countries, has a constitutional right to
privacy. But Brazil has no comprehensive data privacy law; instead it relies on a
patchwork of sectoral laws. China’s constitution refers to privacy indirectly,
but the country has very few speciﬁc laws. On the other hand, Hong Kong has a
Personal Data Ordinance that covers public and private data processors and
both electronic and non-electronic records [14]. India, a popular destination for
outsourcing, recognizes a right to privacy against entities in the public sector,
but has enacted only a limited number of privacy statutes with scant coverage
for the private sector.
The protection afforded data in various countries should be a factor in the
cloud provider’s choice of data-center location since the cloud user’s data will
be subject to the laws of that country.
Against this backdrop of diverse approaches to privacy around the world,
we will look more closely at the laws of two countries, Canada and Australia.
Canada’s Personal Information Protection and Electronic Documents Act
(PIPEDA). PIPEDA is intended to “support and promote electronic commerce
by protecting personal information that is collected, used, or disclosed in
certain circumstances. . .” [15]. Canada, unlike the EU with its state-to-state
approach, has taken an organization-to-organization approach to privacy. In
essence, organizations are held accountable for the protection of personal
information it transfers to third parties, whether such parties are inside or
outside of Canada. Since PIPEDA requires that the contractual arrangements
provide a “comparable level of protection while the information is being
processed by a third-party PIPEDA Principal 4.1.3 [16], the law is enforced
through contractual arrangements between entities, regardless of their geo-
graphic location. The key to PIPEDA is Principle 1 of CSA Model Code for the
Protection of Personal Information [17], which provides that an organization is
responsible for information under its control. The CSA principles are in a
schedule of PIPEDA.
There are many nuances to PIPEDA; but when transacting in Canadian data
or with Canadian companies, cloud providers and users should expect that the
contract will expressly handle privacy protection as a matter of Canadian law.
Cloud providers should be able to demonstrate methods to protect personal
information.
600
LEGAL ISSUES IN CLOUD COMPUTING


Australia Privacy Act. Australia’s Privacy Act [18] is based on (a) 11 “In-
formation Privacy Principles” [19] that apply to the public sector and (b) 10
“National Privacy Principles” [20] that apply to the private sector. These
principles address public and private sector use, disclosure, and management of
personal data, among other things. Australian entities may send personal data
abroad, so long as (1) the entity believes the recipient will uphold the principles,
(2) it has consent from the data subject, or (3) the transfer is necessary to
comply with contractual obligations.
The Ofﬁce of the Privacy Commissioner expects that Australian organiza-
tions will ensure that cloud providers that collect and handle personal
information comply with National Privacy Principles 4 and 9. They require
that an organization (1) take steps to ensure that the personal information it
holds is accurate, up-to-date, and secure and (2) protect personal information
that it transfers outside Australia.
24.3
CLOUD CONTRACTING MODELS
24.3.1
Licensing Agreements Versus Services Agreements
Summary of Terms of a License Agreement. A traditional software license
agreement is used when a licensor is providing a copy of software to a licensee
for its use (which is usually non-exclusive). This copy is not being sold or
transferred to the licensee, but a physical copy is being conveyed to the licensee.
The software license is important because it sets forth the terms under which the
software may be used by the licensee. The license protects the licensor against
the inadvertent transfer of ownership of the software to the person or company
that holds the copy. It also provides a mechanism for the licensor of the
software to (among other things) retrieve the copy it provided to the licensee in
the event that the licensee (a) stops complying with the terms of the license
agreement or (b) stops paying the fee the licensee charges for the license.
Additionally, the software license usually offers the licensee protection from
the software’s violation of the third party’s intellectual property rights (i.e.,
intellectual property infringement). In the case of infringement the license
agreement provides a mechanism for the licensor to repair, replace, or remove
the software from the licensee’s possession.
Summary of Terms of a Service Agreement. A service agreement, on the
other hand, is not designed to protect against the perils of providing a copy of
software to a user. It is primarily designed to provide the terms under which a
service can be accessed or used by a customer. The service agreement may also
set forth quality parameters around which the service will be provided to the
users. Since there is no transfer of possession of a copy of software and the
service is controlled by the company providing it, a service agreement does not
necessarily need to cover infringement risk, nor does it need to set forth the
24.3
CLOUD CONTRACTING MODELS
601
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>


scenarios and manner in which a copy of software is to be returned to the
vendor when a relationship is terminated. Since the software service is
controlled by the provider, the attendant risks and issues associated with
transferring possession of software without transferring ownership do not exist.
Value of Using a Service Agreement in Cloud Arrangements. In each of
the three permutations of cloud computing (SaaS, PaaS, and IaaS), the access
to the cloud-based technology is provided as a service to the cloud user. The
control and access points are provided by the cloud provider. There is no
conveyance of software to the cloud user. A service agreement covers all the
basic terms and conditions that provide adequate protection to the cloud user
without committing the cloud provider to risk and liability attendant with the
licensing of the software.
24.3.2
On-Line Agreements Versus Standard Contracts
There are two contracting models under which a cloud provider will grant
access to its services. The ﬁrst, the on-line agreement, is a click wrap agreement
with which a cloud user will be presented before initially accessing the service. A
click wrap is the agreement the user enters into when he/she checks an “I Agree”
box, or something similar at the initiation of the service relationship. The
agreement is not subject to negotiation and is generally thought to be a contract
of adhesion (i.e., a contract that heavily restricts one party while leaving the
other relatively free). There is complete inequality in bargaining power in click
wrap agreements because there is no ability to negotiate them. The click wrap is
currently the most commonly used contracting model. The second model,
the standard, negotiated, signature-based contract will have its place as well—
over time. As larger companies move to the cloud (especially the public cloud),
or more mission-critical applications or data move to the cloud, the cloud user
will most likely require the option or a more robust and user-friendly agree-
ment. This will be the case notwithstanding the economies associated with
resource pooling, multi-tenancy, and virtualization offered by the cloud (that
are maximized when the cloud provider uses a one-size-ﬁts-all approach—even
at the contracting level), as increasingly complex or sensitive information begins
to be process in the cloud; the cloud user will push for a negotiated agreement.
24.3.3
The Importance of Privacy Policies Terms and Conditions
The privacy policy of a cloud provider is an important contractual document
for the cloud user to read and understand. Why? In its privacy policy the cloud
provider will discuss, in some detail, what it is doing (or not doing, as the case
may be) to protect and secure the personal information of a cloud user and its
customers. The cloud user may get a sense of how the cloud provider is
complying with various privacy laws by reviewing the privacy policy. Even if
the cloud provider is in full compliance with laws, a data compromise could still
occur. The privacy policy may be where one ﬁnds the limits the cloud provider
602
LEGAL ISSUES IN CLOUD COMPUTING


is placing on its liability in such an event. It is not negotiated, but a potential
cloud user should be particularly interested in its terms. If the privacy
protections appear inadequate or insufﬁcient, the cloud user may wish to
consider other cloud providers with more desirable or robust protections.
The cloud provider should be explicit in its privacy policy and fully describe
what privacy security, safety mechanisms, and safety features it is implement-
ing. As further incentive for the cloud provider to employ a “do what we say we
do” approach to the privacy policy, the privacy policy is usually where the FTC
begins its review of a company’s privacy practices as part of its enforcement
actions. If the FTC discovers anomalies between a provider’s practices and its
policies, then sanctions and consent decrees may follow.
Risk Allocation and Limitations of Liability. Simply stated, the limitation
of liability in an agreement sets forth the maximum amount the parties will
agree to pay one another should there be a reason to bring some sort of legal
claim under the agreement. As a practical matter, contractual risk (e.g.,
provision of warranties, assuming liability for third parties under the provider’s
control, covenants to implement certain industry standards, service level
agreements, etc.) is not distributed evenly between the parties. This is due in
part because the performance obligations primarily fall on the provider. This
sets up the traditional thinking that the contractual risk should follow the party
with the most signiﬁcant performance obligations. In reality, the cloud provider
may have the bulk of the performance obligations, but may seek to take a “we
bear no responsibility if something goes wrong” posture in its contracts,
especially if those contracts are click wrap agreements. In fact, some cloud
providers disclaim all liability in their agreements, even disclaiming liability if
they are at fault or negligent in their performance. Over time, cloud services will
be provided under both types of contracts. For mission-critical deployments
the cloud provider will likely take on much more signiﬁcant ﬁnancial liability
and contractual risk as part of the deal. This risk and liability will be reﬂected in
the negotiated contract. The cloud user will pay a fee premium for shifting the
liability and contractual risk to the cloud provider. The cloud provider’s
challenge, as it sees the risk and liability proﬁle shift requiring it to assume
heightened provider obligations, will be to appropriately mitigate contract risk
using technological or other types of solutions where possible. Examples of
mitigation could include implementation of robust and demonstrable informa-
tion security programs, implementing standards or best practices, developing
next generation security protocols, and enhancing employee training.
24.4
JURISDICTIONAL ISSUES RAISED BY VIRTUALIZATION
AND DATA LOCATION
Jurisdiction is deﬁned as a court’s authority to judge acts committed in a certain
territory. The geographical location of the data in a cloud computing
24.4
JURISDICTIONAL ISSUES RAISED BY VIRTUALIZATION AND DATA LOCATION
603


environment will have a signiﬁcant impact on the legal requirements for
protection and handling of the data. This section highlights those issues.
24.4.1
Virtualization and Multi-tenancy
Virtualization. Computer virtualization in its simplest form is where one
physical server simulates being several separate servers. For example, in an
enterprise setting, instead of having a single server dedicated to payroll systems,
another one dedicated to sales support systems, and still a third dedicated to
asset management systems, virtualization allows one server to handle all of
these functions. A single server can simulate being all three. Each one of these
simulated servers is called a virtual machine.
Some beneﬁts of virtualization are the need for less hardware and consump-
tion of less power across the virtualized enterprise. Virtualization also provides
greater utilization and maximization of hardware processing power. Because of
these beneﬁts, virtualization should lower expenses associated with operating a
data center.
Virtualization across a single or multiple data centers makes it difﬁcult for
the cloud user or the cloud provider to know what information is housed on
various machines at any given time. The emphasis in the virtualized environ-
ment is on maximizing usage of available resources no matter where they reside.
Multi-tenancy. Multi-tenancy refers to the ability of a cloud provider to
deliver software as-a-service solutions to multiple client organizations (or
tenants) from a single, shared instance of the software. The cloud user’s
information is virtually, not physically, separated from other users. The major
beneﬁt of this model is cost-effectiveness for the cloud provider. Some risks or
issues with the model for the cloud user include (a) the potential for one user to
be able to access data belonging to another user and (b) difﬁculty to back up
and restore data [21].
24.4.2
The Issues Associated with the Flexibility of Data-Location
One of the beneﬁts of cloud computing from the cloud provider’s perspective is
the ability of the cloud provider to move data among its available data center
resources as necessary to maximize the efﬁciencies of it overall system. From a
technology perspective, this ability to move data is a reasonably good solution
to the problem of under utilized machines.
Data Protection. In fact, in the cloud environment it is possible that the same
data may be stored in multiple locations at the same time. For example, real
time-transaction data may be in one geographic location while the backup or
disaster recovery systems may be elsewhere. It is also likely that the agreement
governing the services says nothing about data location. There are exceptions,
however. In fact, a few cloud providers (of which Amazon.com is one) are
604
LEGAL ISSUES IN CLOUD COMPUTING


allowing cloud customers of certain service offerings to choose whether their
data are kept in a U.S. or European data center [22].
Examples of the issues raised by data location are highlighted by Robert
Gellman of the World Privacy Forum:
The European Union’s Data Protection Directive offers an example of the
importance of location on legal rights and obligations. Under Article 4 . . . [O]nce
EU law applies to the personal data, the data remains subject to the law, and the
export of that data will thereafter be subject to EU rules limiting transfers to a third
country. Once an EU Member State’s data protection law attaches to personal
information, there is no clear way to remove the applicability of the law to the data [23].
From a legal perspective, ﬂexibility of data location potentially challenges
the governing law provision in the contract. If the law speciﬁed in the contract
(e.g., the contract says that laws of Thailand will govern this agreement)
requires a certain treatment of the data, but the law of the jurisdiction where
the data resides (e.g., data center in Poland) requires another treatment, there is
an inherent conﬂict that must be resolved. This conﬂict exists regardless of
whether the storage is temporal, and as part of the processing of the data, or
long-term storage that might be a service in itself (i.e., infrastructure as a
service), or part of a software or platform as a service offering.
24.4.3
Other Jurisdiction Issues
Conﬁdentiality and Government Access to Data. Each jurisdiction (and
perhaps states or provinces within a jurisdiction) has its own regime to protect
the conﬁdentiality of information. In the cloud environment, given the
potential movement of data among multiple jurisdictions, the data housed in
a jurisdiction is subject to the laws of that jurisdiction, even if its owner resides
elsewhere. Given the inconsistency of conﬁdentiality protection in various
jurisdictions, a cloud user may ﬁnd that its sensitive data are not entitled to the
protection with which the cloud user may be familiar, or that to which it
contractually agreed.
A government’s ability to access data is also directly connected to the
jurisdiction in which the data reside. If the jurisdiction has laws that permit its
government to get access to data (with or without notice to the cloud user or the
individual or entity that owns the data), that data may be subject to interception
by the government. In fact, under the USA PATRIOT Act, law enforcement
agencies may gain access to personal ﬁnancial information, email, and all other
forms of electronic communications after certifying (a relatively low standard)
that the information is relevant to any ongoing criminal investigation [24].
Subcontracting. A cloud provider’s use of a third-party subcontractor to
carry out its business may also create jurisdictional issues. The existence or
nature of a subcontracting relationship is most likely invisible to the cloud user.
24.4
JURISDICTIONAL ISSUES RAISED BY VIRTUALIZATION AND DATA LOCATION
605


If, in the performance of the services, there was a lapse that was due to the
subcontractor’s performance, the location of the subcontractor or the data
acted on by the subcontractor will be difﬁcult for a cloud user to ascertain. As a
result, the risk associated with the acts of or the locations of the subcontractor
are difﬁcult to measure by the cloud user.
24.4.4
International Conﬂicts of Laws
The body of law known as “conﬂict of laws” acknowledges that the laws of
different countries may operate in opposition to each other, even as those laws
relate to the same subject matter. In such an event, it is necessary to decide
which country’s law will be applied. Every nation is sovereign within its own
territory. That means that the laws of that nation affect all property and people
within it, including all contracts made and actions carried out within its
borders. When there is either (1) no statement of the law that governs a
contract, (2) no discussion of the rules regarding conﬂicts of laws in the
agreement, or (3) a public policy in the jurisdiction which mandates that the
governing law in the agreement will be ignored, the question of which nation’s
law will apply to the transaction will be decided based on a number of factors
and circumstances surrounding the transaction. This cannot be reduced to a
simple or easy-to-apply rule.
In a cloud environment, the conﬂicts of laws issues make the cloud provider’s
decisions regarding cross-geography virtualization and multi-tenancy, the cloud
user’s lack of information regarding data location, and the potential issues with
geographically diverse subcontractors highly relevant.
24.5
COMMERCIAL AND BUSINESS CONSIDERATIONS—A CLOUD
USER’S VIEWPOINT
As potential cloud users assess whether to utilize cloud computing, there
are several commercial and business considerations that may inﬂuence the
decision-making. Many of the considerations presented below may manifest in
the contractual arrangements between the cloud provider and cloud user.
24.5.1
Minimizing Risk
Maintaining Data Integrity. Data integrity ensures that data at rest are not
subject to corruption. Multi-tenancy is a core technological approach to
creating efﬁciencies in the cloud, but the technology, if implemented or
maintained improperly, can put a cloud user’s data at risk of corruption,
contamination, or unauthorized access. A cloud user should expect contractual
provisions obligating a cloud provider to protect its data, and the user
ultimately may be entitled to some sort of contract remedy if data integrity is
not maintained.
606
LEGAL ISSUES IN CLOUD COMPUTING


Accessibility and Availability of Data/SLAs. The service-level agreement
(SLA) is the cloud provider’s contractually agreed-to level of performance for
certain aspects of the services. The SLA, speciﬁcally as it relates to availability
of services and data, should be high (i.e., better than 99.7%), with minimal
scheduled downtime (scheduled downtime is outside the SLA). Regardless of
the contract terms, the cloud user should get a clear understanding of the cloud
provider’s performance record regarding accessibility and availability of
services and data. A cloud provider’s long-term viability will be connected to
its ability to provide its customers with almost continual access to their services
and data. The SLAs, along with remedies for failure to meet them (e.g., credits
against fees), are typically in the agreement between the cloud provider and
cloud user.
The cloud user may ﬁnd that many cloud providers offer relatively low
SLAs—that is, SLAs that provide little assurance of quality to the user, as well
as little likelihood of SLA default by the provider. The cloud user may also ﬁnd
that it bears the burden of establishing the occurrence of and requesting
whatever remedies are available for a default. This approach is allowable
(though not desirable) because there is no law, for the most part, requiring or
mandating SLAs. The SLA is borne out of a business need that outsourcing
service providers faced long before cloud computing. The service providers’
customers were asking for certain contractual levels of quality. The response
over time was the creation of the SLA to incentivize the provider to perform at
high levels and to compensate the user when the service quality did not reach
that level. The SLA is a contractual creation and is borne out of contract, not
out of the law itself. Because of this reality, cloud providers have no
requirement to use SLAs, create robust SLAs, or police them.
Disaster Recovery. For the cloud user that has outsourced the processing of
its data to a cloud provider, a relevant question is, What is the cloud provider’s
disaster recovery plan? What happens when the unanticipated, catastrophic
event affects the data center(s) where the cloud services are being provided? It is
important for both parties to have an understanding of the cloud provider’s
disaster recovery plan.
24.5.2
Viability of the Cloud Provider
In light of the wide diversity of companies offering cloud services, from early
stage and startup companies to global, publicly traded companies, the cloud
provider’s ability to survive as business is an important consideration for the
cloud user. A potential cloud user should seek to get some understanding about
the viability of the cloud provider, particularly early-stage cloud providers.
Why is this important? A cloud user will make an investment in (1)
integrating the cloud services into its business processes and (2) migrating the
data from its environment into the cloud environment. The lack of standardi-
zation among cloud providers will make it difﬁcult and potentially costly for
24.5
COMMERCIAL AND BUSINESS CONSIDERATIONS—A CLOUD USER’S VIEWPOINT
607


the cloud user to transition from one cloud provider to the other. Because
of the costs associated with (1) and (2) above, cloud users will tend to stick with
a cloud provider in the same way that it sticks with certain software applica-
tions. Therefore the long-term viability of the cloud provider is important.
Does Escrow Help?. Software escrow is the provision of a copy of the source
code by the owner or licensor of the source code to a neutral third party (an
escrow agent) for safekeeping for the beneﬁt of a licensee or user of the code
(the user is a beneﬁciary). The escrow agent releases the software to the
beneﬁciary upon the occurrence of certain predeﬁned events—for example,
bankruptcy of the owner. So, at least for SaaS cloud users, escrow is an option.
But escrow is not available to the cloud user unless expressly offered by the
cloud provider in its agreement.
Even if the cloud provider offers the cloud user the option of source code
escrow, the nature of the code—and even the manner in which it is implemented
in a production environment—may prevent effective replication of the cloud
service by a cloud user in the event of a release. So, it is an option, but it is an
unattractive and potentially unworkable one. For cloud users that use the cloud
for platform or infrastructure, escrow arrangements are not an option, since
there is no practical way to escrow (or utilize in the event of a release) a
platform or infrastructure. However, in the cases of platform and infrastruc-
ture, escrow may be a non-issue. The organization utilizing the platform or
infrastructure may hold and deploy code in its possession; therefore control of
the source in the event of a bankruptcy event may not be problematic.
What is a cloud user to do? Assuming that the cloud user has some ﬂexibility
to negotiate contract terms, the reasoned approach is for the cloud user to get
contractual assurances that in the event of cessation of business, or some lesser
event (e.g., bankruptcy), it will at least have access to its data and information
without penalty or without being subject to the bankruptcy laws of a
jurisdiction as a prerequisite. If the contract does not provide such a right, a
user must determine whether to simply run the risk regarding the provider’s
viability. Equally as important, the cloud user should consider having a
business continuity plan that contemplates a cloud provider no longer being
able to provide a service.
24.5.3
Protecting a Cloud User’s Access to Its Data
Though the ability for the cloud user to have continual access to the cloud
service is a top consideration, a close second, at least from a business continuity
standpoint, is keeping access to its data. This section introduces three scenarios
that a cloud user should contemplate when placing its data into the cloud.
There are no clear answers in any scenario. The most conservative or risk-
averse cloud user may consider having a plan to keep a copy of its cloud-stored
dataset in a location not afﬁliated with the cloud provider.
608
LEGAL ISSUES IN CLOUD COMPUTING


Scenario 1: Cloud Provider Files for Bankruptcy. In a bankruptcy
proceeding, data are treated as a non-intellectual asset and under Section 363
of the U.S. Bankruptcy Code, and it is subject to disposition in a manner
similar to other non-intellectual assets. Data may be consumer-type data, or it
may be the business-level transaction data of the bankrupt cloud provider’s
business customers. Regardless of the type of data, the interests of the cloud
provider and the cloud user with respect to the data will most likely diverge
upon the ﬁling of a bankruptcy. The bankrupt cloud provider wants to create as
much value in the company as possible to facilitate various exits from the
bankruptcy (of which an acquisition may be one). Consumer-level data is a
valuable asset that might be transferred in a bankruptcy. Furthermore, the
ability to access business-level customer data may be particularly attractive to a
potential suitor that is competitive with the bankrupt entity, or even compe-
titive with some of the business customers of the bankrupt entity whose data
may be subject to transfer.
The cloud user is probably equally concerned about keeping its data
(regardless of type) private and out of third-party hands without its consent.
The cloud user’s options are closely tied to the language of the privacy policy of
the cloud provider. That language, along with an analysis by a “consumer
privacy ombudsman,”5 if one is appointed, will likely determine the fate of
personally identiﬁable information. The ombudsman uses a multi-factor
assessment that includes a review of (a) the potential gains or losses to
consumers if the sale was approved and (b) potential mitigating alternatives.6
Any transfer is likely to be under privacy terms similar to those of the cloud
provider. There is no equivalent analysis undertaken by the ombudsman for
business-level transaction data. Business data are likely to be handled at the will
of the bankruptcy court. The good news is that a cloud user probably will not
lose access to its data. However, a third-party suitor to the bankrupt cloud
provider may gain access to such data in the process.
Scenario 2: Cloud Provider Merges or Is Acquired. Any number of
situations could lead to the transfer of the cloud provider’s operation and
the information associated with it, to a third party. The most likely scenarios
include the merger or acquisition of the business, or the sale of a business unit
or service line. Since a cloud user is unlikely to be notiﬁed prior to the closing of
a transaction, once again the privacy policy is the best place to look to
determine what would happen to user data in such an event. The click wrap
agreement will clarify the termination options available to the cloud user
should it be dissatisﬁed with the new ownership.
Scenario 3: Cloud Provider Ceases to Do Business. As a best case, if
there is an orderly shutdown of a cloud provider as part of its cessation
511 U.S.C.A. y 332.
6Id.
24.5
COMMERCIAL AND BUSINESS CONSIDERATIONS—A CLOUD USER’S VIEWPOINT
609


activities, the cloud user may have the ability to retrieve its data as part of the
shut-down activities. In the event that a cloud provider simply walks away and
shuts down the business, cloud users are most likely left with only legal
remedies, ﬁling suit, for example, to attempt to get access to its data.
24.6
SPECIAL TOPICS
24.6.1
The Cloud Open-Source Movement
In Spring 2009 a group of companies, both technology companies and users of
technology, released the Open Cloud Manifesto [25]. The manifesto’s basic
premise is that cloud computing should be as open like other IT technologies.
The manifesto sets forth ﬁve challenges that it suggests must be overcome
before the value of cloud computing can be maximized in the marketplace.
These challenges are (1) security, (2) data and applications interoperability,
(3) data and applications portability, (4) governance and management, and
(5) metering and monitoring. The manifesto suggests that open standards and
transparency are methods to overcome these challenges. It then suggests that
openness will beneﬁt business by providing (a) an easier experience transition-
ing to a new provider, (b) the ability for organizations to work together,
(c) speed and ease of integration, and (d) a more available, cloud-savvy talent
pool from which to hire.
The open-source movement has, over time, changed the way software
is developed and distributed. Though the open-source dialogue surround-
ing cloud computing is in its early stages, an open source will affect the
technological, business, and legal conversation on cloud computing.
24.6.2
Litigation Issues/e-Discovery
From a U.S. law perspective, a signiﬁcant effort must be made during the
course of litigation to produce electronically stored information (ESI). This
production of ESI is called “e-discovery.” The overall e-discovery process has
three basic components: (1) information management, where a company
decides where and how its information is processed and retained, (2) identify-
ing, preserving, collecting, and processing ESI once litigation has been
threatened or started, and (3) review, processing, analysis, and production of
the ESI for opposing counsel [26]. The Federal Rules of Civil Procedure require
a party to produce information within its “possession, custody, or control.” 7
Courts will likely recognize that the ESI may not be within a cloud user’s
possession, but courts will suggest, and maybe assume, that ESI is within its
control. This means that the cloud user likely has the legal requirement to get
access to its ESI upon demand. With this as the foundational principle, a cloud
7Fed.R. Civ. P. 34(a)(1).
610
LEGAL ISSUES IN CLOUD COMPUTING


user will have to work closely with a cloud provider, perhaps even entering into
a separate agreement at the onset of litigation to facilitate the cloud provider’s
provision of the cloud user’s ESI for e-discovery purposes. The agreement, if it
is necessary, should deal with issues surrounding retention and preservation of
ESI; identify which party bears the responsibility for lost data; and decide how
and on what timeframes disclosure of the ESI must occur.
The most challenging issue in the cloud e-discovery context is that of cross-
border discovery. There are signiﬁcant litigation risks where the information
sought by a company for disclosure is located in a foreign country. Countries
that take radically different approaches to cross-border information transfers
simply raise the risk and expense associated with e-discovery. United States
courts have not excused compliance with discovery orders based on arguments
that foreign laws prohibit the discovery; any company that attempts to avoid
e-discovery by asserting that its cloud provider is outside of the territory and
that information is undiscoverable is likely to be accused of avoiding litigation.
This can result in the imposition of ﬁnes and sanctions.
24.7
CONCLUSION
This chapter was intended to survey the broad set of legal issues that may
require consideration in cloud computing. The issues primarily fall into four
areas: data privacy and security, contracting issues, issues surrounding location
of the data, and business considerations.
The law always lags behind technological innovation, and the complexities
of cloud computing will force the law to catch up in order for effective legal
remedies to be available to prevent and provide redress for harms that occur.
24.8
EPILOGUE
“After 36 nonstop hours, untold cups of coffee, cans of energy drinks, and
slices of pizza, Mike, Nikhil, and I ﬁnally headed home. The crisis had been
partially averted, but that was the best that we could do. There had been an
attack on our systems—malicious in nature. Fortunately, that untested disaster
recovery plan worked reasonably well. We didn’t lose too much data, or have
too much downtime. But the breach caught the eye of U.S. and EU ofﬁcials—
and the lawyers, lots of lawyers from all those customers that we had to call.
We’d done reasonably well, had our policies up-to-date, and employed best in
breed techniques to protect the data. Our systems management applications
allowed us to get a quick handle on where our data really was at the time of the
attack. And though we’d failed to meet some of our SLAs (our customers
experienced a short window of unavailability), those service credits we would
have to pay were a mere pittance compared to the losses we could have
incurred.
24.8
EPILOGUE
611


As we walked to our cars, I noticed the color had returned to Mike and
Nikhil’s faces. Even through the haze of my fatigue, I could tell they’d further
elevated themselves to super-miracle-worker status—not totally because of
what they did in those 36 hours, but because of all the work they’d done the
months and years before that to keep those 36 hours from turning into
Armageddon. They’d worked with our security team, our business team, our
legal counsel, and senior management to develop a strategy for running our
business and to keep it running in the event of a potential catastrophe. All that
effort to make sure we’d gotten it right (and that prayer that only God and IT
types hear) paid off. Next time you see those guys walking down the street, be
sure to thank them. The data they saved might have just been yours. . ..”
REFERENCES
1.
NIST Cloud computing deﬁnition, http://csrc.nist.gov/groups/SNS/cloud-compu
ting/index.html, 2009.
2.
National Institute of Standards and Technology, http://www.nist.gov, 2009.
3.
Financial Services Modernization Act (GrammLeachBliley), Pub. L. No. 106-
102, 113 Stat. 1338 (November 12, 1999), codiﬁed at 15 U.S.C. yy6801-09.
4.
T. L. Forsheit, and K. J. Mathews, Financial Privacy Law, Proskauer on Privacy,
y2:4.2, pp. 246, Practicing Law Institute, USA, 2006.
5.
GrammLeachBliley Safeguards Rule-Subtitle A, Disclosure of Nonpublic
Personal Information, codiﬁed at 15 U.S.C. y 68016809.
6.
FTC guidance on business compliance with Safeguards Rule, http://www.ftc.gov/
bcp/edu/pubs/business/idtheft/bus54.shtm, 2009.
7.
The Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act of 2003 (FACT), Pub. L. No.
108159, 117 Stat. 1952 (December 4, 2003).
8.
FTC guidance on business compliance with Red Flags Rule, http://ftc.gov/opa/
2007/10/redﬂag.shtm, 2009.
9.
Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (HI-
TECH), Title XIII of Division A and Title IV of Division B of the American
Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009 (ARRA), Pub. L. No. 111-5, 123 Stat 115,
February 17, 2009, 42 USC sec. 17931 et seq.
10.
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA), Pub. L.
No. 104191, 110 Stat. 1936 (August 21, 1996) (codiﬁed as amended in scattered
sections of 42 U.S.C. and 29 U.S.C.).
11.
Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to
Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001 (USA PATRIOT Act), Pub. L. No.
107-56, 115 Stat. 272, October 26, 2001, codiﬁed at various code sections
12.
The USA PATRIOT ACT, Electronic Privacy Information Center, http://epic.org/
privacy/terrorism/usapatriot/.
13.
EU Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and the Council of 24 October
1995 on the Protection of Individuals with Regard to the Processing of Personal
Data and the Free Movement of Such Data, 1995 O.J. (L281) 31.
612
LEGAL ISSUES IN CLOUD COMPUTING


14.
Personal Data (Privacy) Ordinance, http://www.pcpd.org.hk/english/ordinance/
ordfull.html, 2009.
15.
PIPEDA,
http://laws.justice.gc.ca/en/ShowDoc/cs/P-8.6//20090818/en?page=1,
2009.
16.
PIPEDA.INFO, http://www.pipeda.info/a/s41.html, 2009.
17.
CSA Model Code for the Protection of Personal Information, http://www.csa.ca/
cm/privacy-code/publications, 2009.
18.
Australia Privacy Act of 1988, http://www.privacy.gov.au/law/act, 2009.
19.
Australia Information Privacy Principles, http://www.privacy.gov.au/law/act/ipp,
2009.
20.
Australia National Privacy Principles, http://www.privacy.gov.au/law/act/npp,
2009.
21.
G. Goldszmidt and I. Poddar, Develop and Deploy Multi-tenant Web-Delivered
Solutions Using IBM Middleware: Part 1: Challenges and Architectural Patterns,
http://www.ibm.com/developersworks/webservices/library/ws-middleware/index.
html, 2009.
22.
Amazon Web Services Offers European Storage for Amazon S3, http://phx.
corporate-ir.net/phoenix.zhtml?c=176060&p=irol-newsArticle&ID=1072982&
highlight, 2009.
23.
R. Gellman, Privacy in the Clouds: Risks to Privacy and Conﬁdentiality from
cloud Computing, February 23, 2009, http://www.worldprivacyforum.org/pdf/
WPF_cloud_Privacy_Report.pdf, 2009.
24.
The USA PATRIOT Act, Electronic Privacy Information Center, http://epic.org/
privacy/terrorism/usapatriot/, 2009.
25.
Open Cloud Manifesto, http://www.opencloudmanifesto.org, 2009.
26.
M. Austrian and W. Ryan, Cloud computing meets e-discovery, Cyberspace
Lawyer, 14(6): 712, 2009.
REFERENCES
613


CHAPTER 25
ACHIEVING PRODUCTION READINESS
FOR CLOUD SERVICES
WAI-KIT CHEAH and HENRY KASIM
25.1
INTRODUCTION
The latest paradigm that has emerged is that of cloud computing where new
evolution of operating model enables IT services to be delivered through next-
generation data-center infrastructures consisting of compute, storage, applica-
tions and databases, built over virtualization technology [1].
Cloud service providers who are planning to build infrastructure to support
cloud services should ﬁrst justify their plans through a strategic and business
planning process. Designing, building, implementing, and commissioning an
underlying technology infrastructure to offer cloud services to a target market
segment is merely a transformation process that the service provider must
undertake to prepare for supporting the processes, management tools, technol-
ogy architectures, and foundation to deliver and support their cloud services.
These foundation elements will be used to produce the cloud service that will be
ready for consumption.
The question then is, How does a service provider qualify and determine that
the service is ready for production? What does production readiness mean?
This chapter explores elements that are required to be designed, planned,
assessed, evaluated, tested, and accepted prior to classifying their service as
production-ready and consumption-ready.
25.2
SERVICE MANAGEMENT
The term service management has been deﬁned in many ways by analysts and
business practitioners.
Cloud Computing: Principles and Paradigms,
Edited by Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg and
Andrzej Goscinski
Copyright r 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
615


The Stationery Ofﬁce [2] deﬁnes service management as follows:
Service management is more than just a set of capabilities. It is also a professional
practice supported by an extensive body of knowledge, experience, and skill.
Van Bon et al. and van der Veen [3] describe service management as:
The capacity of an organization to deliver services to customers.
Based on analysis and research of service management deﬁnitions, we deﬁne
service management as a set of specialized organizational capabilities for
providing value to customers in the form of services. The practice of service
management have expanded over time, from traditional value-added service
such as banks, hotels, and airlines into IT provider model that intends to adopt
service-oriented approach in managing and delivering IT services.
This delivery model of IT services to the masses, where assets, resources, and
capabilities are pooled together, is what we would term a form of cloud service.
The lure of cloud services is its ubiquity, pervasiveness, elasticity, and ﬂexibility
of paying only for what you use.
25.3
PRODUCERCONSUMER RELATIONSHIP
As we contemplate on the new paradigm of delivering services, we can reﬂect
upon the closely knit underlying concept of the classical producerconsumer
relationship in the design, implementation, and production of the service as
well as in the consumption of the service. The producerconsumer relationship
diagram is shown in Figure 25.1.
The producer, also known as cloud service provider, refers to the party who
strategizes, designs, invests, implements, transitions, and operates the under-
lying infrastructure that supplies the assets and resources to be delivered as a
cloud service. The objective of the producer is to provide value-add as a cloud
service, which will deliver value to their customers by facilitating outcomes
customers want to achieve.
The consumer refers to the party who will subscribe, use and pay for what
they use from the available resources of the cloud service. Consumers are the
cloud service users and typically would ﬁnancially compensate the provider for
the use of cloud service. For example, a consumer may have a need for a
terabyte (1 terabyte 5 1000 gigabytes) of secured storage to support its private
human resource documentation. From a strategic perspective, the consumer
would want the equipment, facilities, staff, and infrastructure for a terabyte of
storage to (a) remain within its span of control, having the ﬂexibility to pay for
what they use, and (b) ramp up capacity quickly if the need arises, or scale
down deployment as required. The consumer does not want to be accountable
for all associated costs and risks, real or nominal, actual or perceived, such as
616
ACHIEVING PRODUCTION READINESS FOR CLOUD SERVICES


designing the technology architectures, management tools, processes, and all
the resources to manage, deliver, and support the service. This concern is
especially ampliﬁed when the need for resources is short-term. The design
complexity, operational uncertainties, and technical trade-offs associated with
maintaining reliable high-performance storage systems lead to costs and risks
that the consumer is not willing take.
The law of demand and supply will provide an efﬁcient ecosystem in which
the consumer with speciﬁc needs will be able to locate and ﬁnd available service
providers in the market that meet the required service demands and at the right
price.
25.3.1
Business Mindset
From a producer’s perspective, it is critical to understand what would be the
right and desired outcome. Rather than focusing on the production of services,
it is important to view from the customer’s perspective. In order for producers
to provide the desired cloud services, some of the questions that the service
provider should address are:
 Nature of business (What is the core business?)
 Target consumer segments (Who are the customers?)
 Cloud service value (What does the consumer desire? How is the service
valuable to consumer?)
 The service usage and charge-back (How does the consumer use the
services? What are the charges?)
Producer/
Service Provider
Wholesaler/
Distributor
Broker/
Agent
Consumer
Direct
Indirect
Retailer/
Dealer
FIGURE 25.1. The producerconsumer relationship diagram.
25.3
PRODUCERCONSUMER RELATIONSHIP
617


Value of service can be added at different levels. Cloud service providers
differentiate themselves from equipment vendors through their added value
and specialization even while using equipments from those similar hardware
vendors as assets. An analogy would be a provider who offers a collaboration
service, encompassing presence, conferencing, commuting, and ﬁle share,
rather than a mere email messaging service. The service provider shifts
customer focus from attributes-driven to fulﬁllment of outcomes. With this
business mindset, it is possible to understand the components of value from the
customer’s perspective.
25.3.2
Direct Versus Indirect Distribution
As shown in Figure 25.1, the arrow lines depict the cloud services that can be
offered by the cloud service provider through two different distribution
channels: direct or indirect. Channel selection is often a choice and like any
other business decisions is highly dependent on the service providers0 strategy,
targeted consumers of the service (internal or external), and the outlook of the
relative proﬁtability of the two distribution channel. Typically, direct channel is
more appropriate than indirect channel in the context of a private cloud service
and where quality assurance matters.
25.3.3
Quality of Service and Value Composition
One characteristic of services in general is the intangibility of the service.
Perception plays a heavier role in assessments of quality in this case than it does
with manufactured products. Figure 25.2 shows a diagram of perception of
quality. Value perception is typically derived from two components: expected
quality and experienced quality. Expected quality refers to level of service that
Expected
Quality
Quality of Service/
Perceived Quality
• Market Recommendation
• Customer Needs
• Value of Service
Experienced
Quality
Value of
Service
Functional
Quality: What?
(Utility)
Service
Quality: How?
(Warranty)
FIGURE 25.2. Perception of quality.
618
ACHIEVING PRODUCTION READINESS FOR CLOUD SERVICES
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>


the customer expects when engaging with a service provider (e.g., market
communication, customer needs, etc.), whereas, experienced quality refers
value of service based on customer’s experience.
The value of a service consists of two primary elements [3]: utility (ﬁtness for
purpose) and warranty (ﬁtness for use).
 Utility (ﬁtness for purpose), or functional quality attribute, is perceived by
customers from the attributes of the service with positive effect on
performance of tasks associated with desired outcomes.
 Warranty (ﬁtness for use), or service quality attribute, is derived from the
positive effect of being available when needed, in sufﬁcient capacity and
magnitude, and dependable in terms of continuity and security.
Utility is what the customer gets. Warranty is how the service is delivered.
Customers’ beneﬁt is derived from a combination of both elements, and it
would not be achieved if one element is missing. Thus it is useful to allocate
adequate focus on logic for both elements during design, development, and
improvement phases. Considering all separate controllable inputs would allow
for wider range of solutions to the challenges of creating, maintaining and
increasing value.
25.3.4
Charging Model
In the 1990s, value pricing was the key phrase in pricing decisions. It was used
widely by many service industries: airlines, supermarkets, car rentals, and other
consumer services industry. It started with Taco Bell offering a value menu with
several entries, such as tacos, for very low prices. With their successes, other
fast-food chains picked up on the concept and started offering their value-
priced menu entries. The early 1990s recession caused industries to pick up on
the value pricing concept, whose utilization was spread across many service
industries. However, we would be careful to distinguish between (a) value
pricing and (b) pricing to value. Pricing to value relies on value estimates of the
dollar customers associates with the service. When coupled with an estimate of
the variable and the ﬁxed costs of producing and delivering a service, this
determines ranges of possible price points that can be charged. Deciding on the
charging model and pricing strategy is a key business strategy that should not
be neglected.
When the term cloud computing was ﬁrst coined, the general idea was that
cloud computing would lower costs [4]. To the consumer, with interim or short-
term needs, it is possible that cloud service could provide a lower cost [1].
However, for the producer, with the need to invest in excess capacity and
deliver the cloud service, it is an expensive undertaking. Due to this reason, the
producer needs to strategically decide the charging model for the service
offering.
25.3
PRODUCERCONSUMER RELATIONSHIP
619


There are several charging models as describe in Gartner report by Plummer
et al. [5], however the below two charging model are the preferred model by the
Cloud service provider:
 Utility Model. Pay-per-use model where consumer is charged on the
quantity of cloud services usage and utilization. This model is similar to
traditionalelectricitycharges.Forexample,aconsumerusessecuredstorage
to support its private work documentation. The consumer is charged $0.50
for every 10 gigabytes of storage that is used. This model provides a lower
startup cost option for a customer in translating TCO to actual utilization.
 Subscription Model. Here the consumer is charged based on time-based
cloud services usage. For example, the consumer is charged a yearly fee for
a dedicated storage of 10 gigabytes to host the company Web site. This
model provides predictable cost outlay and provides a steady stream of
revenue for the services provider.
25.4
CLOUD SERVICE LIFE CYCLE
The input to the production of a cloud services are all the resources and assets
that will compose the cloud service (i.e., in the form of hardware, software, man
power required from developer to the management level and cost). The
outcome of the cloud services production is an acceptable and marketable
cloud service, which will provide a measurable value to the business objectives
and outcomes. The sets of inputs are transformed to derive the outcome by
using the cloud service life cycle. The cloud service life cycle consists of ﬁve
phases as shown in Figure 25.3 and Table 25.1 summarizes each of the phase in
cloud service life-cycle.
At the core of the cloud service life cycle is service strategy, which is the
fundamental phase in deﬁning the service principles. The main core of the cloud
Service
Strategy
Service
Design
Service
Transition
Service
Operation
Continuous Service 
Improvement
FIGURE 25.3. Cloud service lifecycle.
620
ACHIEVING PRODUCTION READINESS FOR CLOUD SERVICES


TABLE 25.1. Cloud Service Life Cycle
Service Phase
Service Strategy
Service Design
Service Transition
Service Operation
Continuous Service
Improvement
Description
Deﬁnes the business
strategies, policies,
objectives
Design of the cloud
services, processes,
and capabilities
Develop the cloud
services for the tran-
sition of services to
production
Production of cloud
services and service
operational support
Maintain and Improve
value of cloud service
to consumer
Objectives
Determines the busi-
ness decision
Design the new/
improved cloud
service to meet busi-
ness requirements
Development, deploy-
ment and validation to
ensure that the cloud
service has correct
capabilities
Ensure the cloud
service value to
consumer
Continuously main-
tain and improve the
value of cloud service
to meet business
needs
Outcome
Business require-
ments and cloud
service descriptions
Cloud service blue-
print or Service
Design Package
(SDP)
Production of the
cloud services that is
ready to go live
Monitoring report,
cloud service
feedback
Cloud services
improvement
621


service life cycle is the key principle that all services must provide measurable
value to business objectives and outcomes, which is reinforced in ITIL service
management as its primary focus [2, 3].
Service design, transition, and operation are the revolving life-cycle stages
and are anchored by continual service improvement. This life cycle revolves
through the continuous service improvement process to provide performance
measurement at each individual phase and a feedback for improvement. This
has become crucial as IT organizations are increasingly forced to operate as
businesses in order to demonstrate a clear return on investment and equate
service performance with business value to the IT’s internal customers.
The necessity of specialization and coordination in the life-cycle approach
has been made available via feedback and control between the functions and
processes across the life-cyle phases.
The cloud service life-cycle approach mimics reality of most organizations
where effective management requires uses of multiple control perspectives.
25.4.1
Service Strategy
Service strategy is the core of the service life cycle. It signiﬁes the birth of the
service. This is the phase where the business deﬁnes the strategies, policies, and
objectives and establishes an understanding of the constraints, requirements,
and business values. Figure 25.4 illustrates the inputs and outcomes of the
service strategy phase.
In the service strategy phase, the cloud service provider would be under-
taking strategic planning on various value creation activities, including
what services are to be designed, what resources are required to build this
cloud services, and what capabilities of the cloud service are to be developed.
Typically, the planning includes the detailed description of the cloud services
(value to be created), deﬁning the market, service portfolio, project timeline,
resources required (number of man-power, budget), risks, and other key factors
inﬂuencing the cloud service production.
The service strategy phase involves a business decision to determine if the
cloud service provider has sufﬁcient resources to develop this type of service
Business Requirements/
Customers
Service
Strategy
Strategies
Policies
Objectives
Resources and
Constrains
FIGURE 25.4. Service strategy.
622
ACHIEVING PRODUCTION READINESS FOR CLOUD SERVICES


and also to determine if production of a cloud service has a business value. The
service strategy is comprised of the following key concepts:
 Value creation
 Service provider types
 Deﬁning the service market
 Demand management
 Financial management
 Return of investment
 Service assets, assessment, and portfolios
 Service capabilities and resources
 Service structures and developing service offerings
The outcome of the service strategy phase is service strategy documentation,
which includes the following components:
 Business requirements—target consumer market and stakeholders
 Risks involved
 Resources required (man-power and budget)
 Functional service requirements
 Service descriptions
 New/improved service timeline
25.4.2
Service Design
The second phase in the cloud service life cycle is service design. The main purpose
of the service design stage of the life cycle is the design of new or improved service
for introduction into the live environment. Figure 25.5 shows the input and the
outcome of the service design phase. In this phase, the service requirements and
speciﬁcation are translated into a detailed cloud service design including the
detailed desired outcome. The main objectives of service design are:
 Aspects of service design
 Service catalogue management
 Service requirements
 Service design models
 Capacity, availability, and service-level management
The key concepts of service design revolve around the ﬁve design aspects, the
design of services, service processes and service capabilities to meet business
demand. The ﬁve key aspects of service design are:
 The design of the services, including all of the functional requirements,
resources, and capabilities needed and agreed.
25.4
CLOUD SERVICE LIFE CYCLE
623


 The design of service management systems and tools, for the control and
management of sustainable services through the life cycle.
 The design of the technology architectures, hardware and software,
required to form the underlying technical aspects to provide the services.
 The design of the policies and processes needed to design, transition,
operate, and improve the services, the architectures and the processes.
 The design of key measurement methods, performance metrics for the
service, cloud service architectures, and their constituent components and
the processes.
The key output of the service design phase is a blueprint of the service
solution, architectures, and standards. This output is what ITIL would term the
service design package (SDP) [2]. The SDP deﬁnes the following with respect to
the service:
 Service-level requirements
 Service design and topology
 Service and operational management requirements
 Organizational readiness assessment plan
 Service program
 Service transition plan
 Service operational acceptance plan
 Service acceptance criteria
25.4.3
Service Transition
The service transition phase intends to implement and deploy what has been
designed and planned. As shown in Figure 25.6, the service transition phase
takes knowledge formulated out of the service design phase, and uses it to plan
Service Strategy
Service
Design
Solution
Designs
Architectures
SDPs
Standards
FIGURE 25.5. Service design.
624
ACHIEVING PRODUCTION READINESS FOR CLOUD SERVICES


for the validation, release and deployment of the service to production. Key
disciplines in service transition are:
 Service development or service change is service built according to service
design package (SDP).
 Service release and deployment ensures the correct release in live
environment.
 Service validation and test ensures that the service has validated correct
capabilities and functionalities.
 Service knowledge management is to share information within the organi-
zation to avoid rediscovering of cloud service capabilities.
Service transition provides a consistent and rigorous framework for evalu-
ating the service capability and risk proﬁle before a new or a changed service is
released or deployed. The key output of the service transition is production of
the services that is ready to go live, which includes:
 Approved service release package and associated deployment packages.
 Updated service package or bundle that deﬁnes end-to-end service(s)
offered to customers.
 Updated service portfolio and service catalogue.
 Updated contract portfolio.
 Documentation for a transferred service.
25.4.4
Service Operation
Service operation is the stage in the cloud service life cycle to provide the
production of the cloud service and the service operational support. Service
operation spans the execution and business performance of processes to
continually strike the balance between cost optimization and quality of services.
It is responsible for effective functioning of components that support services.
Service Design
Service
Transition
Transition
Plans
Tested
Solutions
SKMS
FIGURE 25.6. Service transition.
25.4
CLOUD SERVICE LIFE CYCLE
625


Effective service operation relies on the ability to know the status of the
infrastructure and to detect any deviation from normal or expected operation.
This is provided by good monitoring and control systems, which are based on
two types of tools:
 Active monitoring tools that poll key conﬁguration items (CIs) to deter-
mine their status and availability. Any exceptions will generate an alert
that needs to be communicated to the appropriate tool or team for action.
 Passive monitoring tools that detect and correlate operational alerts or
communications generated by CIs.
25.4.5
Continuous Service Improvement
As business demand increases, customer requirement changes, market land-
scape ﬂuctuates, and the service needs to adapt to these changing conditions to
improvise and compete. Buyya et al. [6] mentioned that: “Quality of service
requirements cannot be static and need to be dynamically updated over time due to
continuing changes in business operations.” The continuous service improvement
phase is to ensure that the service remains appealing to meet the business needs.
This is achieved by continuously maintaining and improving the value of
service to consumers through better design, transition, and operation.
25.5
PRODUCTION READINESS
An authorization to commence service transition is considered one of the key
outputs from service design to initiate the transitioning activities. In the cloud
service life-cycle point of view, production readiness refers to the successful
conclusion of the service transition phase and the production of the required
outputs from service transition to service operation. Reaching the state where a
service is ready to be transitioned into service operation is what we term
production readiness.
A service is deemed to be implemented and within the service operation stage
of its life cycle when its processes, functions, organizational structure, and
underlying technology have reached the business operational state.
25.6
ASSESSING PRODUCTION READINESS
The underlying IT infrastructure supporting the cloud service is similar to the
ecosystem of compute resources, data, and software applications, which need to
be managed, measured, and monitored continuously to ensure that it is function-
ing as expected. The healthy functioning of this ecosystem is what we would refer
to as operational health of the service. Operational health is determined by the
626
ACHIEVING PRODUCTION READINESS FOR CLOUD SERVICES


execution of this ecosystem in delivery of the services and is dependent on the
ability to prevent incidents and problems, achieve availability targets and service-
level objectives, and minimize any impact to the value of the service.
Several key criteria that the cloud service provider needs to assess before the
service is ready for production is what we term assessing production readiness.
The main objective in assessing production readiness is to achieve a successful
transition from development of cloud service into the service operational phase.
The secondary objective is to ensure that the cloud service is healthy function-
ing. The readiness of a service for operation is to ensure that the following key
assessments are in place.
 Service Facilities Readiness. Facilities to build and sustain a cloud service
have been established.
 Service Infrastructure Readiness. Hardware components (servers, storages,
and network components) have been delivered and meet the requirements.
 Service Technology Readiness. Software components and other necessary
components have been installed and deployed on the infrastructure.
 Monitoring Readiness. Track the conditions, events, and anomalities on
the cloud infrastructure.
 Service Measurement Readiness. Evaluate the service utilization and
validate that the charge-back amount is accurate.
 Service Documentation. Deﬁne service procedure, manual, and instruction
to ensure that the service is well-deﬁned, structured, maintained, and
supported.
 Communication Readiness. Identify all activities related to communication
issues related to service operation.
 Service Operational Readiness. Ready to support operations and main-
tenance of the services.
 Key Performance Indicators (KPI). Effective metric of measurement for
the service has been developed.
 Acceptance Testing. The service is considered to be ready for production
when it has passed an adequate level of measurement set in KPI metrics.
The nature of each production readiness assessment is described in more
detail below.
25.6.1
Service Facilities Readiness
At the core of all components required to build and sustain a cloud service is a
data-center facility. Facilities refer to the physical real-estate housing infra-
structure that is required to host cloud infrastructure for the cloud service.
Cloud services boast advantages of elasticity and capabilities to allow con-
sumers to increase or decrease their resource consumption; therefore, it can be
25.6
ASSESSING PRODUCTION READINESS
627


implied that there will be a need for constructing excess capacity in terms of the
IT infrastructure. This translates to more requirements for hosting space to
accommodate more assets, requirement for better facility (i.e., more cooling
capacity, power consumption, ﬂoor loading).
The facility to host cloud infrastructure plays an important role in cloud
service design. Some of the considerations that a cloud service provider should
take into account are:
 Physically Secured Environment. The cloud infrastructure facility should
be reasonably secured and protected. For example, facility space has
adequate access controls to permit entry for authorized personnel only.
 Free or Mitigated from Natural Disaster. Design of the facility should
include mitigation features against common natural disasters known to
the area. For example, if the facility is located at an earthquake zone, the
data-center facility should be able to withstand a minimum seismic
movement without a major outage or to have mitigated such risks to
ensure that the service levels are able to be met [7]. An alternative facility
should be sourced if no mitigation is possible with regard to infrastructure
risk to degree of common natural disasters.
 Cooling and Power Availability. The facility design should be at the right
size to maintain adequate level of redundancy and availability to meet
required service levels for the cloud service. Right-sizing means having a
design with adequate tiering (as per Uptime Institute’s tier classiﬁcation)
that is sufﬁcient to meet the service levels and not more than required.
Cooling and power constraints [7] should be reviewed to ensure that as
servicing grows along with the business, there should be sufﬁcient cooling
capacity and power capacity to meet the growing physical demand.
 Network Connectivity Bandwidth. Cloud services are likely to be delivered
to consumers over the network, therefore bandwidth availability and
capacity play an important role. There should be capacity planning and
accurate forecasting to project the dynamic demands on network band-
width based on the number of consumers, take-on rates, and usage
patterns without direct consequences to the cloud service levels.
Assessing production readiness in terms of service facilities readiness means:
Facilities to build and sustain a cloud service have been established.
25.6.2
Service Infrastructure Readiness
Service infrastructure readiness is to ensure that all the hardware components
have been delivered and meet the requirements of the service design. Hardware
components refer to the physical IT assets of the cloud infrastructure, which will
fulﬁll the compute and storage resources. Hardware components include
compute servers, disk storages, network devices, and appliances that are
628
ACHIEVING PRODUCTION READINESS FOR CLOUD SERVICES


collectively used in the makeup of the technology architecture and conﬁgured as
the cloud infrastructure. The challenges and considerations for hardware are:
 Compute Servers. The following factors inﬂuence the decision of compute
server selection:
 Proprietary hardware components and ease of replacement. Because
compute resources should be easily provisioned from a collective group
of server hardware, proprietary hardware components and ease of
replacement or acquisition of the servers should be high in order to
easily acquire and grow.
 Hardware reliability is less of a concern, depending on the ability of the
software architecture to automatically re-deploy compute resources
whenever there is a fault.
 Platform or operating systems compatibility. Compute servers should
be able to operate on a hypervisor or abstraction layer that can support
most of the common platforms or operating systems without compat-
ibility issues.
 Disks Storages. The following factors inﬂuence the decision of disk
storage selection:
 Virtualization layer that can encapsulate the underlying disk storage
arrays. With the design of this layer, it would enable provisioning of
lower-cost storage arrays to accommodate storage capacity demands.
 Proprietary hardware components and ease of replacement. Similar to
compute resources, hard disks should be easily provisioned from a
collective group of storage pool. Hence, storage architecture should be
open and replacement of additional storage should be easily acquired
without incurring exorbitant marginal costs.
 Hardware reliability is less of a concern, depending on the level of data
protection in the design.
 Networking Infrastructure. Selection and choice of networking devices will
be dependent on the topology, architecture design, data ﬂow, and
anticipated usage patterns.
The major risks or challenges involved in hardware components is the risk of
the hardware failure beyond the tolerance of the acceptable service levels. The
design of the cloud service architecture and infrastructure as well as the service
strategy is crucial to ensure right-sized infrastructure. To offer a higher-end
service level and to prevent the risks of unplanned outages or service-level
breaches, some cloud service providers adopts “fail-over” functionality, where
it will replace the faulty compute servers or disks storages with the available
servers/disks that has similar conﬁguration.
Assessingproductionreadinessintermsofserviceinfrastructurereadinessmeans:
Hardware components have been delivered and are right-sized.
25.6
ASSESSING PRODUCTION READINESS
629


25.6.3
Service Technology Readiness
As cloud services are predominantly IT services, the underlying infrastructure
are often delivered within the governance of a set of software logic. While the
hardware components provide the resources available to the customer, the
software components control, manage, and allow the actual usage of these
resources by the consumers.
The purpose of service technology readiness is to deﬁne the resources
required, items of service assets, software components, and other components
necessary to build and deploy the services on the cloud infrastructure.
Software components typically cover the operating systems, application
technologies, virtualization technologies, and management systems tools to
operate and deliver the cloud service. Considerations are what would be the
appropriate software technologies to adopt, how these technologies would ﬁt
the hardware piece of the equation, licensing considerations, and what are the
operational limitations or advantages of the selected software technologies. In
terms of software components, the challenges faced by the cloud service
providers are:
 Data Corruption. Cloud services which host consumers’ data are usually
burdened with the responsibility of ensuring the integrity and availability
of these data, depending on the subscribed service level. In most cases, the
bare minimum should be that software applications used are error-free to
avoid any major data corruption or outage.
 Logical Security. In terms of information security, an appropriate control
of logical security should be adopted by the producer to ensure adequate
conﬁdentiality (i.e., data and transactions are open only to those who are
authorized to view or access them).
 Data Interoperability. Producer should follow the interoperability stan-
dards in order for the consumers to be able to combine any of the cloud
services into their solutions.
 Software Vulnerability and Breaches. There are occasions when the public
community discovers vulnerabilities of speciﬁc software, middleware, Web
services, or other network services components in the software compo-
nents. The producer should ensure that a proper strategy and processes are
in place to address such vulnerabilities and ﬁxed to prevent breaches.
Assessing production readiness in term of Servicetechnology readiness means:
Software components have been installed, conﬁgured, and deployed.
25.6.4
Monitoring Readiness
Monitoring readiness refers to having the ability and functions to monitor and
track the conditions, events, and anomalities on the cloud infrastructure during
630
ACHIEVING PRODUCTION READINESS FOR CLOUD SERVICES


the consumption of the cloud services. In the context of service operation, the
measurement and control of services is based on a continual cycle of monitor-
ing, reporting, and subsequently remedial action. While monitoring capability
takes place during service operation, it is fundamental to predeﬁne the strategic
basis requiring this capability, designing it, and testing this capability to ensure
its functional fulﬁllment. The monitoring readiness should at least include the
following features:
 Status tracking on key conﬁguration items (CIs) and key operational
activities.
 Detect anomality in the service operations and notify the key personnel in
charge.
 Ensure that performance and utilization of key service components are
within speciﬁed operating condition.
 Ensure compliance with the service provider’s policies.
Assessing production readiness in terms of monitoring readiness means:
CapabilitytotracktheconditionsandanomalitiesontheCloudinfrastructure.
25.6.5
Service Measurement Readiness
Thepurposeof theservice measurementreadiness criteria is to evaluatetheservice
utilization and validate that the service charge-back amount to the consumer is
accurate. It becomes necessary for the service provider to monitor, measure, and
report on component levels to the point that is granular enough that provides a
meaningful view of the service as the consumer experiences the value of service.
Assessing production readiness in terms of service measurement readiness
means:
Evaluate the service usage and validate that the charge-back amount is
accurate.
25.6.6
Service Documentation
Established service portfolio, service catalogue, design blueprints, service-level
agreements, operational level agreements, process manuals, technical proce-
dures, work instructions, and other service documentation are necessary to
ensure that the service is well-deﬁned, structured, and able to be maintained
and supported. When the service undergoes some changes, the service doc-
umentation needs to be updated.
Assessing production readiness in terms of Service documentation means:
Service documentation (e.g., procedure, manual) are well-deﬁned and
maintained.
25.6
ASSESSING PRODUCTION READINESS
631


25.6.7
Communication Readiness
The purpose of communication readiness is to identify all the activities related
to communication issues related to the service operation (e.g., identify medium,
format, key personnel to be notiﬁed for customer support or during critical
message). Communication readiness criteria include customer support scenar-
ios, frequently asked questions (FAQs), help-desk personnel, and key personnel
when there are abnormalities in the service operations.
Assessing production readiness in terms of communication readiness means:
Identify all the activities related to communication issues related to service
operation.
25.6.8
Service Operational Readiness
Being production ready also requires a certain level of maturity in operational
processes. Operational processes include the technology and management tools
implementation to ensure the smooth running of the cloud infrastructure.
These operational processes are broadly categorized into the following:
 Event management is a process that monitors all events occurring through
the IT infrastructure to allow for normal operation, as well as to detect
and escalate exception conditions.
 Incident management is a process that focuses on restoring, as quickly as
possible, the service to normal operating conditions in the event of an
exception, in order to minimize business impact.
 Problem management is a process that drives root-cause analysis to
determine and resolve the cause of events and incidents (reactive), and
activities to determine patterns based on service behavior to prevent
future events or incidents (proactive).
 Request fulﬁllment is a process that involves the management of customer
or user requests that are not generated as an incident from an unexpected
service delay or disruption.
 Security Management is a process to allow authorized users to use the
service while restricting access to nonauthorized users (access control).
 Provisioning management is a process that allows the cloud service provider
to conﬁgure and maintain the infrastructure remotely. Advantages include
ease of use, speed in provisioning, and ease of maintenance of the cloud
infrastructure.
Assessing production readiness in terms of service operational readiness
means:
Ready to support the operations and maintenance of the services.
632
ACHIEVING PRODUCTION READINESS FOR CLOUD SERVICES


25.6.9
Key Performance Indicators (KPIs)
KPIs should be set and deﬁned as part of the service design to develop an
effective metric of measurement for the service. An effectiveness service metric
can be achieved by focusing on a few vital, meaningful indicators that are
economical and useful for measuring results of the service performance. Some
of the examples of KPIs that can be established are:
 Metrics measuring performance of the service against the strategic
business and IT plans
 Metrics on risks and compliance against regulatory, security, and corpo-
rate governance requirements for the service
 Metrics measuring ﬁnancial contributions of the service to the business
 Metrics monitoring the key IT processes supporting the service
 Service-level reporting
 Metrics measuring customer satisfaction
Assessing production readiness in terms of key performance indicators
means:
Effective metric of measurement for the service has been developed.
25.6.10
Acceptance Testing
The last criteria before a cloud service is ready for production is an adequate
level of measurement set in the KPI metrics. There are several tests that should
be planned and carried out:
 Load Testing. Simulating expected and stretched loads for stress testing
 User Testing. Simulating user activities, including provisioning, transac-
tional, and other usage patterns.
 Fault Tolerance Testing. Fault tolerance testing is to stress test the service
architecture in the event of an unexpected fault.
 Recovery Testing. Testing of recovery procedures in the event of failure to
determine the accuracy of recovery procedures and the effects of failure on
the consumers.
 Network Testing. Assessment of network readiness and latency require-
ments to determine if the cloud infrastructure is capable of allowing the
maximum number of concurrent consumers (under planned maximum
load).
 Charging and Billing Testing. Validate charging, billing and invoicing for
the use of a cloud services.
25.6
ASSESSING PRODUCTION READINESS
633


Assessing production readiness in terms of acceptance testing means:
The service has passed an adequate level of measurement set in KPI metrics.
25.7
SUMMARY
In this chapter we discussed the consideration for cloud service providers to
build the cloud service. To the cloud service provider, designing, building,
implementing, and commissioning underlying technology infrastructure trans-
lates to creating the foundation to produce the service that is ready for
consumption. This chapter provides clarity on what are the elements that are
required to be assessed, evaluated, tested, and accepted prior to classifying a
produced service is ready for consumption. These foundation elements will be
used to produce the cloud service that will be ready for consumption.
REFERENCES
1.
K. Stanoevska-Slabeva, and T. Wozniak, S. Ristol, Grid and Cloud Computing: A
Business Perspective on Technology and Applications, Springer, Berlin, 2009.
2.
The Stationery Ofﬁce, The Ofﬁcial Introduction to the ITIL Service Lifecycle, OGC
(Ofﬁce of Government Commerce), United Kingdom, 2007.
3.
J. van Bon and A. van der Veen, Foundations of IT Service Management based on
ITIL, Vol. 3, Van Haren Publishing, Zaltbommel, September 2007.
4.
M. Miller, Cloud Computing: Web-based applications that change the way you
work and collaborate online, Que, 2008.
5.
D. C. Plummer, D. Smith, T. J. Bittman, D. W. Cearley, D. J. Cappuccio, D. Scott,
R. Kumar, and B. Robertson, Gartner highlights ﬁve attributes of cloud computing,
Gartner Report, Vol G00167182, pp. 15, May 5, 2009.
6.
R. Buyya, C. S. Yeo, and S Venugopal, Market-oriented cloud computing: Vision,
hype, and reality for delivering IT services as computing utilities, in Proceedings of
the 10th IEEE International Conference on High Performance Computing and
Communications (HPCC 2008, IEEE CS Press, Los Alamitos, CA, USA), Dalian,
China, September 2527, 2008.
7.
D. Alger, Build the Best Data Center Facility for Your Business, Cisco Press,
Indianapolis, USA, June 2005.
634
ACHIEVING PRODUCTION READINESS FOR CLOUD SERVICES


INDEX
Amazon Cloud, 459
.NET, 83
Integration as a Service, 57
Admission Control, 420
Adoption, 99
Amazon Web Service, 28, 459
Aneka, 32, 251
Apache VCL, 21
App Engine, 32
Application as a Service, 438
Application Performance, 366
Application Service Providers, 415, 595
AppLogic, 21
Attribute, 197
Authentication, 239
Authorization, 240
Autonomic Cloud, 275
Autonomic Computing, 13
Availability, 20
B2Bi, 84
Boomi Software, 74
Budget-Based policy, 291
Bungee Connect, 74
Business Applications, 299
Business Drivers, 112
Business Orientation, 400
Cast Iron Systems, 94
Change Management, 551, 559
Charging Model, 619
Citrix Essentials, 22
Client-side attack, 240
Cloud Environment, 440
Cloud Infrastructure, 157
Cloud Mashups, 533
Cloud Migration, 50
Cloud Practices, 468
Cloud Security, 577
Cloud Services, 615
Cloud Storage, 513, 519
CloudFront, 513
CloudMQ, 79
Cluster as a Service, 193
CometCloud, 275
Compliance, 305
Components, 470
Conﬁdentiality, 228
Connectivity, 70
Connector, 197
Consumption, 99
Content Delivery Networks, 511
Credentials, 477
Customization, 17, 304
Data Integrity, 71
Data Location, 603
Data Lock-In, 35
Data Management, 541
Data Mediation, 70
Data privacy protection, 234
Data Privacy, 596
Data Protection, 604
Data Security, 573
Data Storage, 221
Deming Cycle, 559
Cloud Computing: Principles and Paradigms,
Edited by Rajkumar Buyya, James Broberg and
Andrzej Goscinski
Copyright r 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
635


Deployment Models, 15
Digital identity, 584
Disaster Recovery, 36, 607
Distributed Management Task Force,
129
Distributed Management, 157
Drivers, 300
Elastic Compute Cloud, 28
Elasticity, 16, 399
Energy Efﬁciency, 36
Enomaly ECP, 22
Enterprise Cloud Computing, 98
Eucalyptus, 22
Fault-Tolerance, 36
Feasibility Analysis, 425
Federated Cloud, 393
Federation, 398
Flexiscale, 30
Force.com, 34
GoGrid, 30
Google App Engine, 195
Governance, 71
GrepTheWeb Hadoop, 486
GrepTheWeb, 479
Grid Computing, 8
GridGain, 385
Hadoop, 375
HadoopMapReduce, 381
Haizea, 149
Heroku, 34
High Performance Computing, 346
Hybrid Clouds, 15
Hypervisor, 28
IDEAS, 364
Identity, 579
Image Management, 163
Image Registration, 287
Independence, 399
Informatics On-Demand, 81
Information Card, 581
Infrastructure as a Service, 13
Integration as a Service, 57
Interoperability, 533
Isolation, 399
Jitterbit, 72
Job Monitoring, 208
Job Submission, 207
Joyent, 30
Jurisdictions, 600
Key Performance Indicators, 633
KVM, 11
LAN, 222
Law Compliance, 597
Leasing, 169
Legal Issues, 593
Licensing Agreements, 601
Linxter, 79
Load balancing, 27
Mainframes, 5
Managed Service Provider, 418
Management, 391
MapReduce, 355, 373
MapReduce.NET, 384
Market Evolution, 108
Mashups, 7
Maturity Model, 563
Microsoft Azure, 34
Microsoft Internet Service Bus, 82
Migration Services, 123
Modularization, 304
Monitoring, 391
Montage, 356
Multimedia Streaming, 535
Multiobjective optimization, 334
Multiplayer Games, 491
Multi-tenancy, 604
Negotiation, 20
Networking, 164
Nimbus 3, 23
Notiﬁcation, 198
On-boarding, 427
Online MQ, 79
Open Cloud Computing Interface
Working Group, 129
Open Grid Forum, 129
Open Source, 610
OpenNebula, 24
636
INDEX


OpenPEX, 24
Operating System, 28
OpSource Connect, 75
Outsourcing, 595
oVirt, 24
Performance Prediction, 439
Persistence, 31
Per-usage Metering, 16
Platform as a Service, 14
Private Clouds, 251
Productivity, 301
Provisioning, 123, 544
Public Clouds, 251
Quality of Service, 323, 618, 521
Query Integrity Assurance, 234
Rackspace Cloud Servers, 31
Recovery, 20
Regulatory Compliance, 555
Replication, 242
Repudiation, 228, 579
Requirements, 300
Reservation, 20
Result collection, 208
Risk Allocation, 603
Salesforce, 196
SAP, 316
Scaling, 27
Scheduling, 166
Scientiﬁc Applications, 345
Self Service, 16
Semantic, 70
Service Design, 623
Service Discovery, 194
Service Level Agreements, 413
Service Life Cycle, 620
Service Management, 615
Service Operation, 625
Service Oriented Architecture, 7
Service Publication, 194
Service Selection, 194
Service Transition, 624
Service Paradigm, 57
Service Level Objectives, 413
Services Agreements, 601
Simple API for Grid Applications, 354
Skynet, 384
SnapLogic, 75
Socio-cultural, 557
Software as a Service, 15
Solution, 300
Standard Contracts, 602
Standardization, 35, 129
Storage Delivery Network, 515
Storage, 222
Subcontracting, 605
Subscription Model, 620
Threats, 407
Transition, 106
Trust, 400, 579
T-Systems, 299
Untrustworthy Storage, 235
User Interface, 26
Utility computing, 9
Utility Model, 620
Value at Risk, 286
Value Composition, 618
vCloud, 25
Virtual Administration, 467
Virtual Appliances, 12
Virtual Engine, 440
Virtual Environments, 537
Virtual Machines, 123
Virtual Management Initiative, 129
Virtualization Format, 12
Virtualization Support, 18
Virtualization, 10
VMWare, 11
vSphere, 25
WAN, 222
Web, 2, 7
Web Server, 134
Web Services Description Language, 193
Web Services, 7
Winning Environment, 558
Workﬂow Engine, 321
Workﬂow Management System, 324
Workload-Based policy, 291
Xen, 11
INDEX
637
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>
