ORIGINAL RESEARCH PAPER
ENABLE HIGH PERFORMANCE COMPUTING IN CLOUD: A REVIEW
Reena Saini
Department of Computer Science, B. K. Birla Institute of Engineering & Technology, 
Pilani 333031, India.
Nachiket Sainis*
Department of Computer Science, B. K. Birla Institute of Engineering & Technology, 
Pilani 333031, India. *Corresponding Author
INTRODUCTION 
In the coming years, the cloud computing market will grow more 
efcient. Many organizations have found using the cloud has a clear 
advantage over in-house hardware. Indeed, shifting what was a capital 
expense to an operational expense has many advantages, including 
instant availability and the ability to scale up (and down) rapidly. In 
HPC, the Globus project has shown the power of grid-based 
computing and has spawned many successful production computation 
grids. Cloud computing takes grid computing to a whole new level by 
using virtualization to encapsulate an operating system (OS) instance. 
In addition to cloud computing, cloud storage also can be used 
independently or combined with OS instances. Cloud computing 
would seem to be an HPC user's dream offering almost unlimited 
storage and instantly available and scalable computing resources, all at 
a reasonable metered cost [4].High Performance computing used in 
parallel processing to run the advanced application program quickly 
and reliable. The term use especially to systems that function above a 
12 
teraop or 10
oating point operations per second. The high 
performance computing is used as a synonym for supercomputing. The 
most common users of high performance computing systems are 
scientic researchers, engineers and academic institutions. Many 
government agencies, particularly the military, also rely on high 
performance computing for complex applications. High-performance 
systems often use custom-made components in addition to so-called 
commodity components. As demand for processing power and speed 
grows, high performance computing will likely interest businesses of 
all sizes, particularly for transaction processing and data warehouses. 
An occasional techno-ends might use an HPC system to satisfy an 
exceptional desire for advanced technology. HPC's democratization 
has been driven particularly by cloud computing, which has given 
scientists access to supercomputing-like features at the cost of a few 
dollars per hour. 
Performing HPC jobs on the cloud is a cost effective solution that 
overcomes and replaces real dedicated cluster. Cloud computing 
providers use service- driven models. All hardware, platform and 
software resources are leased to customer on-demand [2]. There are 
four cloud categories which are: Infrastructure as a service (IaaS), 
Platform as a service (PaaS), Software as a service (SaaS) [1]. 
Hardware as a service (HaaS)-on demand access to a specic 
computation, storage and networking products and/or equipment 
conguration possibly at a particular site [3].
ANATOMY OF HPC
Performance of a HPC is measured in oating point operations per 
second (FLOPS). As of, there are HPC which can perform up-to 
quadrillions of FLOPS. HPC used only a few processors in the 
beginning but as years passes, HPC with thousands of processors 
began to appear and, by the end of the 20th century, massively parallel 
high performance computer with tens of thousands of "off-the-shelf" 
processors were the norm. Tianhe-2 HPC is currently the fastest in the 
world at 33.86 petaFLOPS (PFLOPS), or 33.86 quadrillion oating 
point operations per second. 
Systems with massive numbers of processors generally take one of two 
paths: In one approach (e.g., in distributed computing), a large number 
of discrete computers (e.g., laptops) distributed across a network (e.g., 
the Internet) devote some or all of their time to solving a common 
problem; each individual computer (client) receives and completes 
many small tasks, reporting the results to a central server which 
integrates the task results from all the clients into the overall solution. 
In another approach, a large number of dedicated processors are placed 
in close proximity to each other (e.g. in a computer cluster); this saves 
considerable time moving data around and makes it possible for the 
processors to work together. 
HPC play an important role in the eld of computational science, and 
are used for a wide range of computationally intensive tasks in various 
elds, including quantum mechanics, weather forecasting, climate 
research, oil and gas exploration, molecular modeling.
High performance computers of interest to small and medium-sized 
business today are really clusters of computers. HPC people often refer 
to the individual computers in a cluster as nodes. A cluster for small 
business could have as few as four nodes, or 16 cores. A common 
cluster size in many businesses is between 16 and 64 nodes, or from 64 
to 256 cores.
The point of having a high performance computer is so that the 
individual nodes can work together to solve a problem larger than any 
one computer can easily solve. The nodes need to coordinate to one 
another in order to work meaningfully together [5].
BENEFITS OF HPC IN CLOIUD
The cloud offers applications a range of benets, including elasticity, 
small startup and maintenance costs, and economics of scale. Today's 
rapidly advancing cloud-technology presents signicant opportunities 
for high-performance computing (HPC). HPC system managers can 
leverage the benets of the cloud model for their traditional HPC 
environments for the best of both worlds. Incorporating or 
transitioning HPC Cloud into your HPC system enables you to better 
meet workload demand, increase system utilization, and make your 
high performance computing system accessible to a wider community 
[6]. 
Ÿ
Scale to better support application and job needs with automated 
workload-optimized node OS provisioning.
Ÿ
Provide simplied self-service access for broader set of users that 
also reduces management and training costs.
Ÿ
Accelerate collaboration or funding by extending HPC resources 
to community partners without their own HPC systems.
Ÿ
Enable pay-for-use with show back and chargeback reporting for 
actual resource usage by user, group, project, or account.
Ÿ
Enable higher cloud-based efciency without the cost and 
disruption of ripping and replacing existing [7].
CHALLENGES
Broader use of HPC in the cloud also presents some key challenges. 
INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH
Information Technology
Volume - 10 | Issue - 05 | May - 2021 | PRINT ISSN No. 2277 - 8179 | DOI : 10.36106/ijsr
ABSTRACT
High Performance Computing (HPC) resulting whole computing power in a way that delivers much higher performance than it could get in typical 
desktop computer or workstation. High Performance Computing (HPC) allows scientists and engineers to solve complex science, engineering, and 
business problems using applications that require high bandwidth, enhanced networking, and very high compute capabilities. HPC's 
democratization has been driven particularly by cloud computing, which has given scientists access to supercomputing-like features as the pay as 
you go. This paper will provide an overview on benets, challenges and future of HPC in cloud.
KEYWORDS
IaaS, SaaS, PaaS, HaaS, HPC
44
International Journal of Scientiﬁc Research


Volume - 10 | Issue - 05 | May - 2021
Primary among them is the lack of high-speed interconnects and noise-
free operating systems to enable tightly coupled High Performance 
computing applications to scale. New optimized virtualization models 
(thin VMs, containers, and so on) are reducing virtualization costs, but 
they're still not noise free. Other challenges include: 
Ÿ
The costing/pricing model, which is still evolving from the 
traditional supercomputing approach of grants and quotas toward 
the pay-as-you-go model typical of cloud-based services.
Ÿ
The submission model, which is evolving from job queuing and 
reservations toward VM deployment.
Ÿ
The bringing of data in and out of the cloud, which is costly and 
results in data lock-in. 
Ÿ
Security, regulatory compliance, and various "ilities" 
(performance, availability, business continuity, service-level 
agreements, and so on).
Ÿ
Increasing complexity in product design with extensive use of 
Monte Carlo simulations with added issues of regulatory 
requirements, and hedging and risk management needs.
Ÿ
Asset and Liability Modeling with a Dynamic Hedging Program. 
Large scale analysis with millions of policies, scenarios and 
trillions of calculations. All based on sensitive market movements, 
long time horizons and complex behaviors. 2.5 million core hour 
runs to target solution over a weekend.
Ÿ
Disparate internal clusters, lack of resource for large problem 
execution, and home grown systems pain [9].
DIFFERENT HPC CLOUD PROVIDER
Ÿ
One of the rst vendors to introduce a true 
Penguin Computing 
HPC cloud was Penguin Computing. The Penguin On Demand, or 
POD cloud, was one of the rst remote HPC services. From the 
beginning, POD has been a bare-metal compute model similar to 
an in-house cluster. Each user is given a virtualized login node that 
does not play a role in code execution. The standard compute node 
has a range of options, including dual four-core Xeon, dual six-
core Xeon, or quad 12-core AMD processors ranging in speed 
from 2.2 to 2.9GHz with 24 to 128GB of RAM per server and up to 
1TB of scratch local storage per node.
Ÿ
R-HPC offers R-Cloud, wherein clients can “rent” HPC 
R-HPC 
resources. R-Cloud offers two distinct computing environments. 
The rst is a Shared Cluster, which offers a login to shared nodes 
and a work queue. This environment offers a classic cluster 
environment and is essentially a “shared cluster in the sky.” Users 
are billed by the job, creating a pay-as-you go HPC service. The 
second environment comprises virtual private clusters that are 
carved out of a shared conguration. Use can be on-demand with 
VLAN access. These systems are billed on a 24/7 basis. R-HPC 
can provide new 3.4GHz quad core Sandy Bridge-based systems 
with 16GB of RAM/node (4GB/core), DDR 2:1 blocking 
InniBand, and 1TB of local disk. 
Ÿ
Amazon EC2 HPC the most well-known cloud provider. 
Originally, the EC2 service was found not suitable for many HPC 
applications. Amazon has since created dedicated “cluster 
instances” that offer better performance to HPC users. Several 
virtualized HPC instances are available on the basis of users' 
needs. Their rst offering is two Cluster Compute instances that 
provide a very large amount of CPU coupled with increased 
network performance (10GigE). Instances come in two sizes, a 
Nehalem-based “Quadruple Extra Large Instance” (eight 
cores/node, 23GB of RAM, 1.7TB of local storage) and a Sandy 
Bridge-based “Eight Extra Large Instance” (16 cores/node, 
60.5GB of RAM, 3.4TB of local storage).Pricing can vary 
depending upon on-demand, scheduled, or spot purchase of 
resources [8].
Ÿ
Univa is known as the place Sun Grid Engine landed after 
Univa 
the Oracle purchase. The companies offer two distinct ways to 
build clouds. The rst is an internal cloud infrastructure system 
that provides “raw” virtual machines using one of several 
methods, including VMware, KVM, Xen, or something more 
sophisticated like OpenStack or VMware vSphere. Their 
UniCloud product uses an Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS) layer 
to create the machines and then directs the IaaS to provision a raw 
machine on the y. Once the machine is provisioned, UniCloud 
takes over as a Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS) layer and does 
additional software provisioning and conguration to turn the raw 
instances into nodes that can then be part of an HPC cluster.
Ÿ
Sabalcore Computing Sabalcore offers HPC systems over the 
Internet for both on-demand and dedicated solutions. On-demand 
access is accomplished using an SSH client or secure remote 
desktop interface from any Windows or Linux laptop, desktop, or 
workstation. Users are provided with an NFS-exported home 
directory with persistent storage for results, code, applications, 
and data. As part of their service, Sabalcore offers accounting tools 
that allow administrators to assign and track usage by users, 
projects, or resources. One interesting feature offered by 
Sabalcore is called Dynamic Cluster Isolation (DCI), which builds 
an optional rewall around the compute nodes of a particular job. 
Ÿ
SGI SGI's cloud computing service is called Cyclone and is 
specically dedicated for technical applications. Through 
Cyclone, SGI offers both a software stack and HPC hardware in a 
non-virtualized environment together with HPC applications. 
Pulling from both open source and commercial vendors, they have 
applications in Computational Biology, Computational Chemistry 
and Materials, Computational Fluid Dynamics, Finite Element 
Analysis, and Computational Electromagnetics. 
Ÿ
Gompute Gompute provides CPU hours, storage, system 
administration, and support for HPC applications, including both 
open source and commercial. For commercial applications, users 
may either start a private license server at Gompute using the 
license key they get from an authorized reseller or allow the 
connection to their local license server. Gompute uses a pay-per-
use model, whereby users get real-time information about their 
consumption for each job. [4].
CONCLUSION
In this paper we are discussing high performance computing on cloud. 
It is the best way to compute complex program easily on cloud. High 
performance computing on cloud increase the efciency, reliability of 
computation of the cluster or we can say speed of the system on cloud 
in the range of teraop or petaop. There are some complexity in high 
performance computing on cloud i.e. disparate internal cluster, lack of 
resource for large problem execution and dynamic hedging problem. 
Some providers that provide high performance computing on cloud 
Penguin Computing Amazon EC2 HPC, SGI etc.
REFERENCES:
[1] 
 A. Marathe, D. Lowenthal, B. Rountree, X.   Yuan, M. Schulz and B. de Supinski, “A 
User Perspective of High-Performance  Computing on the Cloud”, The University of 
Arizona, Lawrance Livermore National  laboratory, March, 2012.
[2]  P ortal.azure.com.(2017).MicrosoftAzure[online]Availableat:https://portal.azure.com/. 
[Accessed 1 Dec. 2017].
[3]   Amit Batra,  Arvind Kumar. “High   Performance Computing into Cloud Services”.  
          International Conference on Computing   Sciences, 2012.
[4] 
 Admin magazine: http://www.admin- magazine.com/HPC/Articles/Moving-HPC-  to-
the-Cloud
[5]   Insidehpc: http://insidehpc.com/hpc- basic- training/what-is-hpc/
[6] 
 T.Groves, “Characterizing and Improving Power  And Performance of HPC Networks”, 
University of  New Mexico and Sandia National Laboratories,   2016. 
[7] 
 Adaptivecomputing:http://www.adaptivecom puting.com/products/hpc-products/ 
moab-   hpc-suite-enterprise-edition/hpc-cloud- overview/
[8] 
 A mazon Web Services, Inc. (2017). Amazon Web Services (AWS), Cloud Computing 
Services. [online]  Available at: https://aws.amazon.com/ [Accessed 1 Dec. 2017].
[9]   Morgan Eldred, Dr. Carl Adams, Dr. Alice Good.  “Trust Challenge in a High 
th
Performance Cloud Computing Project”. IEEE 6  International Conference on Cloud 
Computing Technology & Science, 2014.
PRINT ISSN No. 2277 - 8179 | DOI : 10.36106/ijsr
International Journal of Scientiﬁc Research
45
