royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsta
Opinion piece
Cite this article: Shalf J. 2020 The future of
computing beyond Moore’s Law. Phil.Trans.R.
Soc.A 378: 20190061.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsta.2019.0061
Accepted: 30 September 2019
One contribution of 15 to a discussion meeting
issue ‘Numerical algorithms for
high-performance computational science’.
Subject Areas:
computer modelling and simulation,
nanotechnology, hybrid computing
Keywords:
high-performance computing, Moore’s Law,
microelectronics, lithography, computing,
post-CMOS
Author for correspondence:
John Shalf
e-mail: jshalf@lbl.gov
The future of computing
beyond Moore’s Law
John Shalf
Department of Computer Science, Lawrence Berkeley National
Laboratory, 1 Cyclotron Road, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
JS, 0000-0002-0608-3690
Moore’s Law is a techno-economic model that has
enabled
the
information
technology
industry
to
double the performance and functionality of digital
electronics roughly every 2 years within a ﬁxed cost,
power and area. Advances in silicon lithography
have enabled this exponential miniaturization of
electronics, but, as transistors reach atomic scale
and fabrication costs continue to rise, the classical
technological driver that has underpinned Moore’s
Law for 50 years is failing and is anticipated to
ﬂatten by 2025. This article provides an updated
view of what a post-exascale system will look
like and the challenges ahead, based on our most
recent understanding of technology roadmaps. It also
discusses the tapering of historical improvements, and
how it affects options available to continue scaling
of successors to the ﬁrst exascale machine. Lastly,
this article covers the many different opportunities
and
strategies
available
to
continue
computing
performance
improvements
in
the
absence
of
historical technology drivers.
This
article
is
part
of
a
discussion
meeting
issue ‘Numerical algorithms for high-performance
computational science’.
1. Introduction
Society has come to depend on the rapid, predictable
and affordable scaling of computing performance for
consumer electronics, the rise of ‘big data’ and data
centres (Google, Facebook), scientiﬁc discovery and
national security. There are many other parts of the
economy and economic development that are intimately
linked with these dramatic improvements in information
technology (IT) and computing, such as avionics systems
for aircraft, the automotive industry (e.g. self-driving
cars) and smart grid technologies. The approaching end
of lithographic scaling threatens to hinder continued
2020 The Author(s) Published by the Royal Society. All rights reserved.
Downloaded from http://royalsocietypublishing.org/rsta/article-pdf/doi/10.1098/rsta.2019.0061/1316697/rsta.2019.0061.pdf
by guest
on 10 June 2026


2
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsta Phil. Trans. R.Soc. A 378: 20190061
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2030
2028
2027
2025
2024
2023
year
2021
2019
2017
2015
2013
0
5
10
physical gate length (nm) 
20
25
2013 report
2015 report
15
Figure 1. The ITRS most recent report predicts transistor scaling will end in 2021 (a decade sooner than was predicted in 2013).
Figure from ITRS. (Online version in colour.)
health of the $4 trillion electronics industry, impacting many related ﬁelds that depend on
computing and electronics.
Moore’s Law [1] is a techno-economic model that has enabled the IT industry to double the
performance and functionality of digital electronics roughly every 2 years within a ﬁxed cost,
power and area. This expectation has led to a relatively stable ecosystem (e.g. electronic design
automation tools, compilers, simulators and emulators) built around general-purpose processor
technologies, such as the ×86, ARM and Power instruction set architectures. However, within a
decade, the technological underpinnings for the process that Gordon Moore described will come
to an end, as lithography gets down to atomic scale. At that point, it will be feasible to create
lithographically produced devices with dimensions nearing atomic scale, where a dozen or fewer
silicon atoms are present across critical device features, and will therefore represent a practical
limit for implementing logic gates for digital computing [2]. Indeed, the ITRS (International
Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors), which has tracked the historical improvements over
the past 30 years, has projected no improvements beyond 2021, as shown in ﬁgure 1, and
subsequently disbanded, having no further purpose. The classical technological driver that has
underpinned Moore’s Law for the past 50 years is failing [3] and is anticipated to ﬂatten by
2025, as shown in ﬁgure 2. Evolving technology in the absence of Moore’s Law will require an
investment now in computer architecture and the basic sciences (including materials science),
to study candidate replacement materials and alternative device physics to foster continued
technology scaling.
(a) Multiple paths forward
To address this daunting problem in both the intermediate and long term, a multi-pronged
approach is required: evolutionary for the intermediate (10 year) term and revolutionary for
the long (10–20 year) term strategy. Timing needs for the intermediate term will require an
evolutionary approach based on achieving manufacturing technology advances allowing the
continuation of Moore’s Law with current complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS)
technology—relying on new computing architectures and advanced packaging technologies such
as monolithic three-dimensional integration (building chips in the third dimension) and photonic
co-packaging to mitigate data movement costs [4,5]. The long-term solution requires fundamental
advances in our knowledge of materials and pathways to control and manipulate information
elements at the limits of energy ﬂow, ultimately achieving 1 attojoule/operation, which would
Downloaded from http://royalsocietypublishing.org/rsta/article-pdf/doi/10.1098/rsta.2019.0061/1316697/rsta.2019.0061.pdf
by guest
on 10 June 2026


3
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsta Phil. Trans. R.Soc. A 378: 20190061
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2030
2025
2020
2015
2010
2005
2000
1995
1990
1985
1980
1975
1
10
102
103
104
105
106
107
performance
transistors
thread performance
clock frequency
power (watts)
# cores
Figure 2. Sources of computing performance have been challenged by the end of Dennard scaling in 2004. All additional
approachestofurtherperformanceimprovementsendinapproximately2025duetotheendoftheroadmapforimprovements
tosemiconductorlithography.FigurefromKunleOlukotun,LanceHammond,HerbSutter,MarkHorowitzandextendedbyJohn
Shalf. (Online version in colour.)
be six orders of magnitude smaller than today’s devices. As we approach the longer term,
we will require ground-breaking advances in device technology going beyond CMOS (arising
from fundamentally new knowledge of control pathways), system architecture and programming
models to allow the energy beneﬁts of scaling to be realized. Using the history of the silicon ﬁn
ﬁeld-effect transistor (FinFET), it takes about 10 years for an advance in basic device physics to
reach mainstream use. Therefore, any new technology will require a long lead-time and sustained
R&D of one to two decades. Options abound, the race outcome is undecided, and the prize
is invaluable. The winner not only will inﬂuence chip technology, but also will deﬁne a new
direction for the entire computing industry and many other industries that have come to depend
heavily on computing technology.
There are numerous paths forward to continue performance scaling in the absence of
lithographic scaling, as shown in ﬁgure 3. These three axes represent different technology scaling
paths that could be used to extract additional performance beyond the end of lithographic
scaling. The near-term focus will be on development of ever more specialized architectures and
advanced packaging technologies that arrange existing building blocks (the horizontal axis of
ﬁgure 3). In the mid-term, emphasis will likely be on developing CMOS-based devices that
extend into the third, or vertical, dimension and on improving materials and transistors that
will enhance performance by creating more efﬁcient underlying logic devices. The third axis
represents opportunities to develop new models of computation such as neuro-inspired or
quantum computing, which solve problems that are not well addressed by digital computing.
2. The complementary role of new models of computation
Despite the rapid inﬂux of funding into these respective technologies, it is important to
understand that they are not replacement technologies for digital electronics as we currently
understand them. They certainly expand computing into areas where digital computing
is deﬁcient. Digital computing is well known for providing reproducible and explainable
Downloaded from http://royalsocietypublishing.org/rsta/article-pdf/doi/10.1098/rsta.2019.0061/1316697/rsta.2019.0061.pdf
by guest
on 10 June 2026


4
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsta Phil. Trans. R.Soc. A 378: 20190061
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Figure 3. There are three potential paths forward to realize continued performance improvements for digital electronics
technology. (Online version in colour.)
calculations that are accurate within the precision limit of the digital representation. Brain-
inspired computational methods such as machine learning have substantially improved our
ability to recognize patterns in ‘big data’ and automate data mining processes over traditional
pattern recognition algorithms, but they are less reliable for handling operations that require
precise response and reproducibility (even ‘explainability’ for that matter). Quantum computing
will expand our ability to solve combinatorically complex problems in polynomial time, but they
will not be much good for word processing or graphics rendering, for example. It is quite exciting
and gratifying to see computing expand into new spaces, but equally important to know the
complementary role that digital computing plays in our society that is not and cannot be replaced
by these emerging modes of computation.
Quantum and brain-inspired technologies have garnered much attention recently due to
their rapid pace of recent improvements. Much of advanced architecture development and new
startup companies in the digital computing space are targeting the artiﬁcial intelligence/machine
learning (AI/ML) market because of its explosive market growth rate. Growth markets are far
more appealing business opportunities for companies and venture capital, as they offer a path
to proﬁt growth, whereas a large market that is static invites competition that slowly erodes
proﬁts over time. As a result, there is far more attention paid to technologies that are seeing a
rapid rate of expansion, even in cases where the market is still comparatively small. So interest
in quantum computing and AI/ML is currently superheated due to market opportunities, but it
is still urgent to advance digital computing even as we pursue these new computing directions.
Neither quantum nor brain-inspired architectures are replacement technologies for functionality
that digital technologies are good at. Indeed, current AI/ML solutions are deeply dependent
upon digital computing technology, and if there is any lesson to be learned from the diversity
of AI/ML hardware solutions, it is that architecture specialization and custom hardware is very
effective—the topic of the next section.
Downloaded from http://royalsocietypublishing.org/rsta/article-pdf/doi/10.1098/rsta.2019.0061/1316697/rsta.2019.0061.pdf
by guest
on 10 June 2026


5
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsta Phil. Trans. R.Soc. A 378: 20190061
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3. Architectural specialization
In the near term, the most practical path to continued performance growth will be architectural
specialization in the form of many different kinds of accelerators. We believe this to be
true because historically it has taken approximately 10 years for a new transistor concept
demonstrated in the laboratory to become incorporated into a commercial fabrication process.
Our US Ofﬁce of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) report with Robert Leland surveyed the
landscape of potential CMOS-replacement technologies and found many potential candidates [4],
but no obvious replacements demonstrated in the laboratory at this point. Therefore, we are
already a decade too late to resolve this crisis by ﬁnding a scalable post-CMOS path forward.
The only hardware option for the coming decade will be architectural specialization and
advanced packaging for lack of a credible alternative. When competing against an exponentially
improving general-purpose computing ecosystem, it was very difﬁcult to compete using
hardware specialization. In the past, the path of specialization has not been productive to pursue
due to long lead-times and high development costs. However, as Thompson & Spanuth’s [6]
article on the evaluation of the economics of Moore’s Law points out, the tapering of Moore’s Law
improvements makes architecture specialization a credible and economically viable alternative
to fully general-purpose computing, but such a path will have a profound effect on algorithm
development and on the programming environment.
Therefore, in the absence of any miraculous new transistor or other device to enable continued
technology scaling, the only tool left to a computer architect for extracting continued performance
improvements is to use transistors more efﬁciently by specializing the architecture to the target
scientiﬁc problem(s), as projected. Overall, there is strong consensus that the tapering of Moore’s
Law will lead to a broader range of accelerators or specialization technologies than we have
seen in the past three decades. Examples of this trend exist in smartphone technologies, which
contain dozens of specialized accelerators co-located on the same chip; in hardware deployed
in massive data centres, such as Google’s Tensor Processing Unit (TPU), which accelerates the
Tensorﬂow programming framework for ML tasks; in ﬁeld-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs)
in the Microsoft Cloud used for Bing search and other applications; and a vast array of other deep
learning accelerators. The industry is already moving forward with production implementation of
diverse acceleration in the AI and ML markets (e.g. Google TPU [7], Nervana’s AI architecture [8],
Facebook’s Big Sur [9]) and other forms of compute-in-network acceleration for mega-data
centres (e.g. Microsoft’s FPGA Conﬁgurable Cloud and Project Catapult for FPGA-accelerated
search [10]). Even before the explosive growth in the AI/ML market, system-on-chip (SoC)
vendors for embedded, Internet of things (IoT) and smartphone applications were already
pursuing specialization to good effect. Shao et al. [11] from Harvard University tracked the growth
rate of specialized accelerators in iPhone chips, and found a steady growth rate for discrete
hardware accelerator units, which grew from around 22 accelerators for Apple’s 6th-generation
iPhone SoC to well over 40 discrete accelerators in their 11th-generation chip. Companies engaged
in this practice of developing such diverse heterogeneous accelerators because the strategy works!
There have also been demonstrated successes in creating science-targeted accelerators such
as D.E. Shaw’s Anton, which accelerates molecular dynamics (MD) simulations nearly 180×
over contemporary high-performance computing (HPC) systems [12], and the GRAPE series
of specialized accelerators for cosmology and MD [13]. A recent International Symposium on
Computer Architecture workshop on the future of computing research beyond 2030 (http://
arch2030.cs.washington.edu/) concluded that heterogeneity and diversity of architecture are
nearly inevitable given current architecture trends. This trend toward co-packaging of diverse
‘extremely heterogeneous’ accelerators is already well under way, as shown in ﬁgure 4.
Therefore, specialization is the most promising technique for continuing to provide the
year-on-year performance increases required by all users of scientiﬁc computing systems, but
specialization needs to have a well-deﬁned application target to specialize for. This creates
a particular need for the sciences to focus on the unique aspects of scientiﬁc computing
for both analysis and simulation. Recent communications with computing industry leaders
Downloaded from http://royalsocietypublishing.org/rsta/article-pdf/doi/10.1098/rsta.2019.0061/1316697/rsta.2019.0061.pdf
by guest
on 10 June 2026


6
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsta Phil. Trans. R.Soc. A 378: 20190061
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
towards extreme heterogeneity
DRAM
hybrid 
memory 
cube
CNFET 
accelerator
MRAM
architecture, device and memory 
heterogeneity
CMOS 
Acc0
CMOS
Acc1
cpu
MRAM
L1 Cache
L1 Cache
Mem
 Acc
MRAM 
Acc
system bus
paradise
+ 
 system architect
GPU/DSP
CPU
buses
MEM
inter-
face
Acc
CPU
Acc
Acc
Acc
Acc
Acc
Acc
Acc
Acc
CPU
buses
MEM
inter-
face
CPU
GPU/
DSP
CPU
buses
MEM
inter-
face
CPU
CPU
CPU
present - CPU+GPU
future -  post-CMOS extreme 
heterogeneity
present - heterogeneous  
architectures
past - homogeneous
architectures
Figure 4. Architectural specialization and extreme heterogeneity are anticipated to be the near-term response to the end of
classical technology scaling. Figure courtesy of Dilip Vasudevan from LBNL. (Online version in colour.)
suggest that post-exascale HPC platforms will become increasingly heterogeneous environments.
Heterogeneous processor accelerators—whether they are commercial designs (evolutions of
GPU or CPU technologies), emerging reconﬁgurable hardware or bespoke architectures that
are customized for speciﬁc science applications—optimize hardware and software for particular
tasks or algorithms and enable performance and/or energy efﬁciency gains that would not be
realized using general-purpose approaches. These long-term trends in the underlying hardware
technology (driven by the physics) are creating daunting challenges for maintaining the
productivity and continued performance scaling of HPC codes on future systems.
As a means to organize the universe of options available, we subdivide the solution space into
three different strategies:
(i) Hardware-driven algorithm design: where we evaluate emerging accelerators in the context
of workload, and modify algorithms to take full advantage of new accelerators.
(ii) Algorithm-driven hardware design: where we design largely ﬁxed-function accelerators
based on algorithm or application requirements.
(iii) Co-develop hardware and algorithms: this represents a cooperative design with a selected
industry partner or partnership to design algorithms and hardware together.
For hardware-driven algorithm design, we recognize that the industry will continue to
produce accelerators that are targeted at other markets such as ML applications. In the near
future, GPUs, accelerators (NVIDIA, AMD/ATI, Intel) and multi-core processors with wide-
vector extensions (such as ARM SVE and Intel’s AVX512) will continue to dominate. However,
the boost in performance offered by the GPUs and wide-vector extensions to CPUs have offered
a one-time jump in performance, but do not offer a new exponential growth path. There are a
number of extensions emerging that are targeted at accelerating the burgeoning AI workloads,
such as NVIDIA’s tensor extensions in the V100 GPU. Such extensions are very speciﬁc tensor
operations that operate at much lower (16-bit and 8-bit) precision, which may limit them unless
algorithms are completely redesigned to exploit these features (where possible). While this puts
the primary burden upon the algorithm and application developers, to some extent this is the
strategy that has more or less been common practice since the ‘attack of the killer micros’
transformed the HPC landscape from purpose-built vector machines to clusters of commercial
off-the-shelf (COTS) nodes nearly 3 decades ago.
Algorithm-driven hardware design would mark a return to past practices of designing
purpose-built machines for targeted high-value workloads. As mentioned earlier, the rapid
Downloaded from http://royalsocietypublishing.org/rsta/article-pdf/doi/10.1098/rsta.2019.0061/1316697/rsta.2019.0061.pdf
by guest
on 10 June 2026


7
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsta Phil. Trans. R.Soc. A 378: 20190061
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
growth and diversity in specialized AI architectures (Google TPU and others) as well as isolated
examples in the sciences (D.E. Shaw’s Anton, SPINNAKER, etc.) demonstrate that this approach
can offer a path to performance growth. However, the development costs are high (tens to
hundreds of millions of dollars per system in today’s technology market), it requires long
development lead times, and it risks having the application requirements shift so as to make
the hardware obsolete. This concern has caused an increased interest in reconﬁgurable hardware
such as FPGAs and coarse-grained reconﬁgurable arrays (CGRAs). These devices allow the logic
and specializations within the chip to be reconﬁgured rather than having to build a new chip. The
challenge with FPGAs is that the extreme ﬂexibility to enable hardware reconﬁguration comes at
a cost of 5× slower clock rates (typical designs run at 200 MHz rather than at the gigahertz clock
rates expected of custom logic) and a reduction of effective logic density (number of usable gates
per chip) by a similar factor. CGRAs, such as Stanford’s Plasticine [14], mitigate these problems
by offering a coarser granularity of reconﬁguration where the building blocks are full ﬂoating-
point adders and multipliers rather than individual wires and gates offered by the FPGAs. The
biggest challenge to making these devices useful is that the tools and programming models for
programming these devices are extraordinarily difﬁcult to use and it requires a lot of effort to
get even simple algorithms to perform well. There is a lot of work going in to developing more
agile hardware design methodologies such as higher-level hardware development languages
(e.g. CHISEL, PyMTL), and more design automation to reduce human effort to make production
of custom chips more affordable.
The third option of deeper co-design is less of a technological option than it is a new
economic model for interacting with the industry that produces computer systems and the
potential customers of said technologies. The era of general-purpose computing led to a more
or less hands-off relationship between technology suppliers and their customers, as documented
by Thompson & Spanuth [6], where a general-purpose processor could serve many different
applications. In an era where specializing hardware to the application is the only means of
performance improvement, the economic model for the design of future systems is going to
need to change dramatically to lower design and veriﬁcation costs for the development of new
hardware. Otherwise, the future predicted by economists such as Thompson is one where high-
value markets such as AI for Google and Facebook will be able to afford to create custom
hardware (the fast lane) and the rest of the market will receive no such boosts (remaining in
the slow lane). To prevent this kind of future from happening, the industry is adopting more
agile hardware production methods such as using chiplets. Rather than have a single large
piece of silicon that integrates together all of the diverse accelerators comprising the customized
hardware, the chiplets break each piece of functionality into a very tiny tile. These chiplets/tiles
are then stitched together into a mosaic by bonding them to a common silicon substrate. This
enables manufacturers to rapidly piece together a mosaic of these chiplets to serve the diverse
specialized applications at a much lower cost and much faster turn-around. However, this
approach falls down if the desired functionality does not already exist in the available chiplets.
Perhaps in the future the ‘algorithm-driven hardware design’ and this chiplets approach might
be able to meet in the middle to bring forth a new economic model that can enable productive
architecture specialization for small markets, such as Dr Sophia Shao’s [11] vision for her Aladdin
integrated hardware specialization/design environment.
(a) Programming system and software challenges
New software implementations, and in many cases new mathematical models and algorithmic
approaches, are necessary to advance the science that can be done with new architectures. This
trend will not only continue but also intensify; the transition from multi-core systems to hybrid
systems has already caused many teams to re-factor and redesign their implementations. But the
next step to systems that exploit not just one type of accelerator but a full range of heterogeneous
architectures will require more fundamental and disruptive changes in algorithm and software
approaches [15]. This applies to the broad range of algorithms used in simulation, data analysis
Downloaded from http://royalsocietypublishing.org/rsta/article-pdf/doi/10.1098/rsta.2019.0061/1316697/rsta.2019.0061.pdf
by guest
on 10 June 2026


8
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsta Phil. Trans. R.Soc. A 378: 20190061
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
and learning. New programming models or low-level software constructs that hide the details
of the architecture from the implementation can make future programming less time-consuming,
but they will not eliminate nor in many cases even mitigate the need to redesign algorithms. Key
elements of a path forward include:
— Understanding the impact of proposed architectures on current mathematical kernels and
algorithms and using this knowledge to steer the HPC hardware deployment choices
through feedback in an iterative co-design process.
— Redesigning current algorithms in response to proposed architectures; hardware choices
should be based not only on current algorithms but also on the potential performance of
new algorithms and even new science use cases.
— Developing advanced programming environments that ease the implementation of these
new algorithms and numerical libraries and are able to generate code for these diverse,
heterogeneous accelerators.
Applied mathematics is critical to our ability to co-design application- and science-relevant
accelerators. There are two categories of applications that will need to be redesigned to run
effectively in a heterogeneous accelerated environment. In the ﬁrst type, a single computational
motif or kernel is paramount, such as stencil computations with ﬁxed spatial patterns. In this
case, there is likely to be a single best choice of hardware design. Most of the success stories
regarding specialized architectures fall into this category. The advances in numerical methods
can be encapsulated in numerical libraries (such as SuperLU, GraphBLAS and STRUMPACK)
and application frameworks (such as AMReX) to make these advances broadly available to the
community. The second, more complex type is that in which solving the science problem requires
fundamentally heterogeneous operations. The heterogeneous operations can be staggered, as one
might envision in a data pipeline; as the data moves through the pipeline, different operations
are performed on it. In this scenario, the data may also be moving physically in steps from
source to destination, making the use of different architectures for different stages transparent and
separable. Heterogeneous simulation algorithms place a different demand in that, unlike the data
example, the ﬂow is more ﬁne-grained and tightly coupled. For example, in a simulation of a time-
evolving state or any iterative solution procedure, each step may contain multiple heterogeneous
substeps, with each step repeated multiple times, perhaps with different relative (i.e. dynamically
changing) costs of the components. No single specialized architecture will be ideal for all stages,
suggesting an architectural layout that allows a single code to exploit multiple specialized
components. Existing hybrid CPU/GPU systems already allow this, and applications are being
re-factored to use this capability; the current trend of ofﬂoading different algorithmic components
to different specialized architectures will not only continue but become more important.
Performance portability is not an achievable goal if we attempt to do it using imperative
languages like Fortran and C/C++. There is simply not enough ﬂexibility built in to the
speciﬁcation of the algorithm for a compiler to do anything other than what the algorithm
designer explicitly stated in their code. To make this future of diverse accelerators usable and
accessible in the former case will require the co-design of new compiler technology and domain-
speciﬁc languages (DSLs) designed around the requirements of the target computational motifs
(the 13 motifs that extended Phil Colella’s original Dwarfs of algorithmic methods [16]). The
higher levels of abstraction and declarative semantics offered by DSLs enable more degrees of
freedom to optimally map the algorithms onto diverse hardware than traditional imperative
languages that over-prescribe the solution. Because this will drastically increase the complexity
of the mapping problem, new mathematics for optimization will be developed, along with better
performance introspection (both hardware and software mechanisms for online performance
introspection) through extensions to the rooﬂine model. Use of ML/AI technologies will be
essential to enable analysis and automation of dynamic optimizations.
Downloaded from http://royalsocietypublishing.org/rsta/article-pdf/doi/10.1098/rsta.2019.0061/1316697/rsta.2019.0061.pdf
by guest
on 10 June 2026


9
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsta Phil. Trans. R.Soc. A 378: 20190061
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1
10
102
103
104
DP flop
register
1 mm on-chip
5 mm on-chip
15 mm on-chip
off-chip/DRAM
local interconnect
cross system
2008 (45 nm)
2018 (11 nm)
picojoules per 64-bit operation
Figure 5. The energy consumption of compute and data movement operations at different levels of the compute hierarchy—
from the arithmetic logic unit on the left to system-scale data movement across the interconnect on the right. As lithography
has improved, the energy efficiency of wires has not improved as fast as the efficiency of transistors. Consequently, moving
two operands just 2 mm across a silicon chip consumes more energy than the floating-point operation performed upon them.
(Online version in colour.)
(b) Data movement challenges
Extracting more compute performance alone may not be sufﬁcient to realize performance gains
in future systems. A potential complication for future digital technologies is that the cost of
data movement (and not necessarily compute) already dominates electrical losses, and could
undermine any potential improvements in compute energy efﬁciency if not addressed. Since the
loss of Dennard scaling in 2004, a new technology scaling regime has emerged. According to
the laws of electrical resistance and capacitance, the intrinsic energy efﬁciency of a ﬁxed-length
wire does not improve appreciably as it shrinks in size with Moore’s Law improvements in
lithography, as elegantly described in Miller’s articles [17,18]. By contrast, the power consumption
of transistors continues to decrease as their gate size (and hence capacitance) decreases. Since the
energy efﬁciency of transistors is improving as sizes shrink, and the energy efﬁciency of wires
is not improving, we have come to a point where the energy needed to move data exceeds the
energy used to perform the operation on those data, as shown in ﬁgure 5. This leads to extreme
bottlenecks and heterogeneity in the cost of accessing data because the costs to move data are
strongly distance-dependent. Furthermore, although computational performance has continued
to increase, the number of pins per chip has not tended to improve at similar rates [19]. This leads
to bandwidth contention, which leads to additional performance non-uniformity. The natural
consequence of this technological limitation is an increased heterogeneity in data movement and
non-uniform memory access (NUMA) effects so long as copper/electrical communication is used.
Data locality and bandwidth constraints have long been concerns for application development
on supercomputers, but recent architecture trends have exacerbated these challenges to the
point that they can no longer be accommodated with existing methods such as loop blocking
or compiler techniques. Future performance and energy efﬁciency improvements will require
more fundamental changes to hardware architectures, advanced packaging approaches and new
algorithm designs.
The most signiﬁcant consequence of these assertions is the impact on scientiﬁc applications
that run on current HPC systems, many of which codify years of scientiﬁc domain knowledge and
reﬁnements for contemporary computer systems. To adapt to computing architectures beyond
Downloaded from http://royalsocietypublishing.org/rsta/article-pdf/doi/10.1098/rsta.2019.0061/1316697/rsta.2019.0061.pdf
by guest
on 10 June 2026


10
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsta Phil. Trans. R.Soc. A 378: 20190061
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2025, developers must be able to reason about new hardware and determine what programming
models and algorithms will provide the best blend of performance and energy efﬁciency into the
future. Even our theory of complexity for numerical methods is based on counting the number of
ﬂoating-point operations, which fails to account for the order of complexity of compulsory data
movement required by the algorithm. Ultimately, our theories about algorithmic complexity are
out of step with the underlying physics and cost model for modern computation. Future systems
will express more levels of hierarchy than we are accustomed to in our existing programming
models. Not only are there more levels of hierarchy, but it is also likely that the topology of
communication will become important to optimize. Programmers are already facing NUMA
performance challenges within the node, but future systems will see increasing NUMA effects
between cores within an individual chip die in the future [15,20]. It will become important to
optimize for the topology of communication; but current programming models do not express
information needed for such optimizations, and current scheduling systems and runtimes are not
well equipped to exploit such information were it available. Overall, our current programming
methodologies are ill-equipped to accommodate changes to the underlying abstract machine
model, which would break our current programming systems. There is a journal article by Unat
et al. [21] from the PADAL (Programming Abstractions for Data Locality) workshop [22] that
outlines the current state of the art in data locality management in modern programming systems
and identiﬁes numerous opportunities to greatly improve automation in these areas.
New algorithms favouring less data movement or higher arithmetic intensity, such as
communication-avoiding and high-order operators, are already being developed, and data-
centric programming abstractions must be built into new partitioned global address space
(PGAS) programming systems in order to confer algorithmic information about data locality
to the underlying software system. These capabilities are even more crucial for heterogeneous
architectures where different accelerators have different memory/communication speeds. More
complex algorithms increase the challenges of performance modelling, and tools such as the
Rooﬂine model need to be improved to take heterogeneity into account. Although applied
mathematicians must lead the effort to re-factor core simulation and analysis algorithms,
they should be working as part of collaborative teams containing algorithm, application,
software, computer architecture and performance analysis expertise. Looking ahead, we expect
to demonstrate algorithmic redesign of simulation algorithms that target multiple specialized
architectures and reﬁne the software prototypes to the point that they can transition to production
release and adoption on leading-edge facilities.
(c) Photonics and rack disaggregation
Architectural specialization is creating new data centre requirements such as emerging accelerator
technologies for ML workloads, and rack disaggregation strategies will push the limits of
current interconnect technologies. While the latest high-throughput processor chips with many
CPU/GPU cores are intrinsically capable of carrying out extremely demanding computing tasks,
they do not have the necessary off-chip bandwidth for full and efﬁcient utilization of their
resources. In addressing this challenge, we must overcome packaging limitations—a challenge
directly related to the limited bandwidth density limitations of current electrical packages.
An alternative to this future is to explore co-integration of photonic technologies that do not
suffer from these data movement distance constraints, such as photonic technologies. Photonic
interconnect technologies have been proposed to address this critical data movement challenge
because of their well-known bandwidth density and energy efﬁciency advantages, but system-
wide energy efﬁciency and performance gains cannot be attained by simple photonic one-to-one
replacement of existing links and switches. Observing that the in-package bandwidth densities
due to the extremely high pin density enabled by copper pillar or solder microbump technologies
is very well matched to photonic technologies, co-packaging of photonics as in-package devices
for ‘photonic MCMs’ (multi-chip modules) has been offered as a potential approach. Whereas
photonic technologies are often sold on the basis of higher bandwidth and energy efﬁciency
Downloaded from http://royalsocietypublishing.org/rsta/article-pdf/doi/10.1098/rsta.2019.0061/1316697/rsta.2019.0061.pdf
by guest
on 10 June 2026


11
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsta Phil. Trans. R.Soc. A 378: 20190061
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
III/V semiconductor
based comb laser
optical fibres
compute MCM
HBM MCM
NIC1
GPU1
GPU2
GPU3
GPU4
GPU1
GPU2
GPU3
GPU4
M
M M
M M
M M
M M
M
CMP1
CMP2
CMP1
MEM
MEM
MEM
MEM
CMP2
NIC2
NIC1
NIC2
photonic
die
CPUs,
GPUs or
router
1) energy-bandwidth
optimized optical links
2) embedded silicon
photonic connectivity into
OC-MCMs
3) bandwidth steering for
flexible connectivity
adaptation
Figure 6. The three primary enabling optical technologies for system-wide disaggregation for data centres—efficient comb
laser sources, photonic MCMs, and optical circuit switches for bandwidth steering to reconfigure the MCMs. System-wide
resource disaggregation offers a path to co-integrating diverse technologies to support diverse workload requirements; this
isbeingdevelopedbyindustry/academiccollaborationssuchastheARPAeENLITENEDPINEefficientdatacentresproject,ledby
Keren Bergman of Columbia University. (Online version in colour.)
(e.g. lower picojoules per bit), these emerging workloads and technology trends will shift
the emphasis to other metrics such as bandwidth density (as opposed to bandwidth alone),
reduced latency and performance consistency. For example, copper-based signalling technologies
currently exhibit a maximum at 54 gigabits/second per wire and are struggling to double that
ﬁgure—with the roadmap slipping by nearly 2 years at this point. By contrast, a single optical
ﬁbre can carry 1–10 terabits/second of bandwidth by carrying many non-interfering channels
down the same path using different colours of light for each channel. This is a full 5 orders
of magnitude improvement in carrying capacity for photonics in comparison to copper wires.
However, such metrics cannot be accomplished with device improvements alone, but require a
systems view of photonics in computing platforms.
Data centres support diverse workloads by purchasing from a limited menu of application-
area-tailored node designs (e.g. big compute node, big DRAM node and big NVRAM node)
and allocate resources based on instantaneous workload requirements. However, this can lead
to marooned resources when the system runs out of one of those node types and is under-
using other node types due to the ephemeral requirements of the workload. The ‘disaggregated
rack’ involves purchasing the individual components and allocating the resources dynamically
from these different node types on an as-needed basis across the rack [23,24]. Data centres are
motivated to support this kind of disaggregation because it enables more ﬂexible sharing of
hardware resources. However, a conventional Ethernet fabric is a severe inhibitor to efﬁcient
resource sharing. Substantial increases in bandwidth density will be required.
Numerous projects have been working on using high-bandwidth-density photonics to
enable this kind of system wide resource disaggregation by pumping up the off-package data
bandwidths [25]. For example, PINE (Photonic Integrated Networked Energy efﬁcient data
centres) is an ARPAe ENLITENED project led by Keren Bergman of Columbia University and
involving numerous industry and university partners, including NVIDIA, Microsoft, Cisco,
University of California–Santa Barbara (UCSB), Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL)
and Freedom Photonics [26,27]. The three principal elements of the project, shown in ﬁgure 6, are
ultra-high-bandwidth-density (multiple terabits/second of bandwidth per ﬁbre using a single
comb laser source) links that are co-packaged with compute accelerators and memory in MCMs.
This approach could revolutionize the use of resource disaggregation within the data centre to
overcome the challenges of co-integrating extremely heterogeneous accelerators. These efforts
Downloaded from http://royalsocietypublishing.org/rsta/article-pdf/doi/10.1098/rsta.2019.0061/1316697/rsta.2019.0061.pdf
by guest
on 10 June 2026


12
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsta Phil. Trans. R.Soc. A 378: 20190061
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
will likely coevolve with new architectural approaches that better tailor computing capability
to speciﬁc problems, driven principally by large economic forces associated with the global IT
market.
4. CMOS replacement: inventing the ‘new transistor’
The development of new devices (e.g. a better transistor or digital logic technology) can greatly
lower the energy consumed by logic operations. The development of the ‘new transistor’ will
require fundamental breakthroughs in materials. The suitability for future computing devices
must be evaluated in the context of circuits and full system architectures in order to determine
how to make best use of those new devices and if efﬁciency improvements at device scale can
translate into delivered improvements to applications at chip and system scale. An integral
dimension of this challenge is combining these two primary paths with other promising avenues,
such as three-dimensional integration and novel memory technologies, as well as packaging
and integration challenges arising from new materials or technology improvements, taking
information and metrology from those studies to guide the development of new post-CMOS
transistor and logic technologies. A prior article written by myself and Robert Leland for the
OSTP in 2013, and then re-released as an IEEE Computer article in 2015 [4], surveys the many
different technology options that are currently available and scores those opportunities. However,
Nikonov & Young [28] introduce us to the challenges of ‘Boltzmann’s tyranny’ for electronic
devices, and also illustrate quantitatively just how far these technologies are from being a clear
candidate for completely replacing CMOS as we know it.
(a) Deep co-design to accelerate the pace of discovery
Typically, new electronic devices—such as new transistors or memory elements—are evaluated
in isolation at a physical level, but this approach fails to capture the architectural-level impact
of the device. It is essential to capture metrics that architects and system designers can use
to reason about the impact of each to architectures, designs and their complex interactions
with existing technologies. Existing hardware design tools do not account for the beneﬁts,
and limitations, of future devices. This creates an urgent and immediate need to efﬁciently
and systematically explore the specialized architectural design space in combination with
emerging device technologies to avoid stalling performance scaling while waiting for radical new
technologies to mature. The ability to guide development of future devices requires evaluation of
their performance based on ultimate outcomes for target applications. The value of new and novel
materials or device technologies is not currently understood in a system context. Performance and
behaviours in a system context are not currently understood in a device or materials context. True
co-design to advance future systems containing novel devices and materials requires feedback
that spans all layers, from atomic-scale materials to large-scale complex systems, to meet the needs
of emerging scientiﬁc applications.
Only with co-design to cover this broad space and consideration of manufacturing challenges
can we expect to make progress in all areas cohesively to bring about real change to the IT
energy outlook. Further, the output of this work will provide a path to sustaining exponential
growth in computing capabilities to enable new scientiﬁc discoveries and maintain economic
vitality in all segments of the computing market (from IoT, to consumer electronics, to data
centres, to supercomputing). LBNL is currently prototyping an integrated approach that spans
from fundamental material discovery to architectures, circuits and full system architectures,
as shown in ﬁgure 7, with the intent to dramatically accelerate the discovery process for
future transistors. Our vision is to develop a co-design framework that integrates the physical
layers, logical layers and control. We must propagate the quantitative information to guide
development of better solutions. The co-design framework would enable us to develop
uniﬁed materials/device/circuit/system electronic design automation simulation tools to ensure
resilience to variability and reduce the development timeline for mission-critical science. The
Downloaded from http://royalsocietypublishing.org/rsta/article-pdf/doi/10.1098/rsta.2019.0061/1316697/rsta.2019.0061.pdf
by guest
on 10 June 2026


13
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsta Phil. Trans. R.Soc. A 378: 20190061
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
circuits
materials physics
junction physics
device physics
systems
bulk material:
~100 atoms
1 junction: 
~100k atoms
1 device:
~1M atoms
circuit/std. cell:
10–100 devices
processor/system:
>10k circuits
current drive, 
switching energy,
transients
clock rates, 
power,
area
junction
physics,
I–V curves  
material 
physics,
carrier mobility
drain
source
substrate
gate
switch speed,
power, area,
fan-out, stability
application
performance,
system power
interface-level, 
losses/per-
formance
materials 
metrics
the impact of advances in materials and structures must be understood at the systems level
Figure 7. LBNL’s prototype deep codesign framework to accelerate the discovery of CMOS replacement technologies. (Online
version in colour.)
long-term solution requires fundamental advances in our knowledge of materials and pathways
to control and manipulate information elements at the limits of energy ﬂow. As we approach
the longer term, we will require ground-breaking advances in device technology going beyond
CMOS (arising from fundamentally new knowledge of control pathways), system architecture
and programming models to allow the energy beneﬁts of scaling to be realized. A complete
workﬂow will be constructed, linking device models and materials to circuits and then evaluating
these circuits through efﬁcient generation of specialized hardware architectural models such that
advances can be compared for their beneﬁts to ultimate system performance. The architectural
simulations that result from this work will yield better understanding of the performance impact
of these emerging approaches on target applications and enable early exploration of new software
systems that would make these new architectures useful and programmable.
In the longer term, we will expand the modelling framework to include non-traditional
computing models and accelerators, such as neuro-inspired and quantum accelerators, as
components in our simulation infrastructure. We will also develop the technology to automate
aspects of the algorithm/architecture/software environment system co-design process so
developers can evaluate their ideas early in future hardware. Ultimately, we will close the
feedback loop from the software all the way down to the device to make software an integrated
part of this infrastructure.
(b) Advanced manufacturing
To meet the goals of broad societal impact, we must ensure transition of basic research to high-
volume manufacturing, and even more fundamentally reshape basic research from the start
with an eye toward manufacturability. This will be achieved through the development of a new
technology development capability that can evaluate and demonstrate the manufacturing and
energy savings feasibility of next-generation technology options. Technologies will be rigorously
evaluated for potential beneﬁts on energy and implications on architecture and programming
paradigms. The most promising technologies will be evaluated for issues around high-volume
manufacturing followed by ramp-up demonstration and getting them to deliver on the
energy promises. This phase will depend heavily on identifying speciﬁc manufacturing/device
Downloaded from http://royalsocietypublishing.org/rsta/article-pdf/doi/10.1098/rsta.2019.0061/1316697/rsta.2019.0061.pdf
by guest
on 10 June 2026


14
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsta Phil. Trans. R.Soc. A 378: 20190061
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
materials where we will leverage the capabilities of advanced HPC capabilities to accelerate the
development through modelling and ‘virtual cycles of learning’. Manufacturing feasibility would
also include demonstration of whatever patterning technology would be needed to support the
various technologies and scaling of those technologies. Delivering on this vision will require the
integration across layers of our R&D institutions and require close partnerships with industry to
ensure success and economic impact.
5. Conclusion
Semiconductor technology has a pervasive role to play in future energy, economic and technology
security. To effectively meet societal needs and expectations in a broad context, these new
devices and computing paradigms must be economically manufacturable at scale and provide an
exponential improvement path. Such requirements could necessitate a substantial technological
shift analogous to the transition from vacuum tubes to semiconductors. This transition will
require not years, but decades, so whether the semiconductor roadmap has 10 or 20 years of
remaining vitality, researchers must begin now to lay a strategic foundation for change.
Data accessibility. This article has no additional data.
Competing interests. The author declares that he has no competing interests.
Funding. LBNL is supported by the Ofﬁce of Advanced Scientiﬁc Computing Research in the Department of
Energy Ofﬁce of Science under contract no. DE-AC02-05CH11231.
Acknowledgements. I would like to acknowledge Ramamorthy Ramesh (LBNL/Berkeley), Dan Armbrust (former
CEO of SEMATECH), Shekhar Borkar (Qualcomm), Bill Dally and Larry Dennison (NVIDIA Research)
and Keren Bergman of Columbia University for productive discussions about the vision for the future of
computing. I would also like to acknowledge the US Ofﬁce of Science and Technology Policy (OSTP) and
John Holdren for commissioning a report from me and Robert Leland (on loan to OSTP from Sandia National
Labs) to research and write a report on ‘Computing beyond Moore’s Law’ for them in 2013 that introduced
me to many of the key technology challenges involved.
Disclaimer. The opinions expressed by the author are his own and not necessarily reﬂective of the ofﬁcial policy
or opinions of the DOE or of LBNL.
References
1. Moore GE. 1965 Cramming more components onto integrated circuits. Electronics 38, 33–35.
(doi:10.1109/N-SSC.2006.4785860)
2. Mack C. 2015 The multiple lives of Moore’s law. IEEE Spectrum 52, 31–31. (doi:10.1109/
MSPEC.2015.7065415)
3. Markov IL. 2014 Limits on fundamental limits to computation. Nature 512, 147–154.
(doi:10.1038/nature13570)
4. Shalf JM, Leland R. 2015 Computing beyond Moore’s law. IEEE Computer 48, 14–23.
(doi:10.1109/MC.2015.374)
5. Law M, Colwell RC. 2013 The chip design game at the end of Moore’s Law. Hot Chips
Symposium. Keynote, pp. 1–16. See https://www.hotchips.org/wp-content/uploads/hc_
archives/hc25/HC25.15-keynote1-Chipdesign-epub/HC25.26.190-Keynote1-ChipDesignGa
me-Colwell-DARPA.pdf.
6. Thompson N, Spanuth S. 2018 The decline of computers as a general purpose technology:
why deep learning and the end of Moore’s Law are fragmenting computing. SSRN
abstract 3287769. (doi:10.2139/ssrn.3287769)
7. Jouppi NP et al. 2017 In-datacenter performance analysis of a tensor processing unit. In
Newslett. ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture News – ISCA’17, vol. 45 (2), May, pp. 1–12.
New York, NY: ACM. (doi:10.1145/3079856.3080246)
8. Hsu J. 2016 Nervana systems: turning neural networks into a service. IEEE Spectrum 53, 19.
(doi:10.1109/MSPEC.2016.7473141)
9. Facebook
Inc.
2017
Introducing
Big
Basin:
our
next-generation
AI
hardware.
See
https://code.facebook.com/posts/1835166200089399/introducing-big-basin-our-next-gener
ation-ai-hardware/.
Downloaded from http://royalsocietypublishing.org/rsta/article-pdf/doi/10.1098/rsta.2019.0061/1316697/rsta.2019.0061.pdf
by guest
on 10 June 2026


15
royalsocietypublishing.org/journal/rsta Phil. Trans. R.Soc. A 378: 20190061
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10. Caulﬁeld A. 2016 A cloud-scale acceleration architecture. In 2016 49th Annu. IEEE/ACM Int.
Symp. on Microarchitecture (MICRO-49), Taipei, Taiwan, 15–19 October, 13pp. New York, NY:
IEEE. (doi:10.1109/MICRO.2016.7783710)
11. Shao YS, Xi SL, Srinivisan V, Wei GY, Brooks D. 2016 Co-designing accelerators
and SoC interfaces using gem5-Aladdin. In 2016 49th Annu. IEEE/ACM Int. Symp. on
Microarchitecture (MICRO-49), Taipei, Taiwan, 15–19 October, 12pp. New York, NY: IEEE.
(doi:10.1109/MICRO.2016.7783751)
12. Shaw DE et al. 2014 Anton 2: raising the bar for performance and programmability in a special-
purpose molecular dynamics supercomputer. In SC’14: Proc. Int. Conf. for High Performance
Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis, New Orleans, LA, 16–21 November, pp. 41–53.
New York, NY: IEEE. (doi:10.1109/SC.2014.9)
13. Ohmura I, Morimoto G, Ohno Y, Hasegawa A, Taiji M. 2014 MDGRAPE-4: a special-purpose
computer system for molecular dynamics simulations. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. A 372, 20130387.
(doi:10.1098/rsta.2013.0387)
14. Prabhakar R, Zhang Y, Koeplinger D, Feldman M, Zhao T, Hadjis S, Pedram A, Kozyrakis C,
Olukotun K. 2018 Plasticine: a reconﬁgurable accelerator for parallel patterns. IEEE Micro 38,
20–31. (doi:10.1109/MM.2018.032271058)
15. Johansen H et al. 2014 Software productivity for extreme-scale science. Report on
DOE
Workshop.
See
http://www.orau.gov/swproductivity2014/SoftwareProductivity
WorkshopReport2014.pdf.
16. Asanovic K et al. 2006 The landscape of parallel computing research: a view from Berkeley.
EECS Department, UC Berkeley. Technical Report No. UCB/EECS-2006-183. See http://
www2.eecs.berkeley.edu/Pubs/TechRpts/2006/EECS-2006-183.pdf.
17. Miller DAB, Ozaktas HM. 1997 Limit to the bit-rate capacity of electrical interconnects
from the aspect ratio of the system architecture. J. Parallel Distrib. Comput. 41, 42–52.
(doi:10.1006/jpdc.1996.1285)
18. Miller DAB. 2000 Rationale and challenges for optical interconnects to electronic chips. Proc.
IEEE 88, 728–749. (doi:10.1109/5.867687)
19. Horowitz M, Yang CKK, Sidiropoulos S. 1998 High-speed electrical signaling: overview and
limitations. IEEE Micro 18, 12–24. (doi:10.1109/40.653013)
20. Kogge P, Shalf J. 2013 Exascale computing trends: adjusting to the ‘new normal’ for computer
architecture. Comput. Sci. Eng. 15, 16–26. (doi:10.1109/MCSE.2013.95)
21. Unat D et al. 2017 Trends in data locality abstractions for HPC systems. IEEE Trans. Parallel
Distrib. Syst. 28, 3007–3020. (doi:10.1109/TPDS.2017.2703149)
22. Unat D, Shalf J, Hoeﬂer T, Dubey A, Schulthess T. 2014 PADAL: Programming Abstractions
for Data Locality Workshop Series. See http://www.padalworkshop.org/.
23. Meyer H, Sancho JC, Quiroga JV, Zyulkyarov F, Roca D, Nemirovsky M. 2017 Disaggregated
computing. An evaluation of current trends for datacentres. Procedia Comput. Sci. 108, 685–694.
(doi:10.1016/j.procs.2017.05.129)
24. Taylor J. 2015 Facebook’s data center infrastructure: open compute, disaggregated rack, and
beyond. In 2015 Optical Fiber Communications Conf. and Exhibition (OFC), Los Angeles, CA,
22–26 March, 1p. New York, NY: IEEE. See https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/abstract/document/
7121902.
25. Tokunari M, Hsu HH, Toriyama K, Noma H, Nakagawa S. 2014 High-bandwidth density and
low-power optical MCM using waveguide-integrated organic substrate. J. Lightwave Technol.
32, 1207–1212. (doi:10.1109/JLT.2013.2292703)
26. Bergman K. 2018 Empowering ﬂexible and scalable high performance architectures
with embedded photonics. In 2018 IEEE Int. Parallel and Distributed Processing Symp.
(IPDPS), Vancouver, BC, Canada, 21–25 May, p. 378. New York, NY: IEEE. (doi:10.1109/
IPDPS.2018.00047)
27. Michelogiannakis G, Wilke J, Teh MY, Glick M, Shalf J, Bergman K. 2019 Challenges and
opportunities in system-level evaluation of photonics. In Metro and Data Center Optical
Networks and Short-Reach Links II, SPIE OPTO, San Francisco, CA, 2–7 February, Proc. SPIE
10946. (doi:10.1117/12.2510443)
28. Nikonov DE, Young IA. 2016 Overview of beyond-CMOS devices and a uniform methodology
for their benchmarking. Proc. IEEE 101, 2498–2533. (doi:10.1109/JPROC.2013.2252317)
Downloaded from http://royalsocietypublishing.org/rsta/article-pdf/doi/10.1098/rsta.2019.0061/1316697/rsta.2019.0061.pdf
by guest
on 10 June 2026
